The Project Gutenberg EBook of Heath's Modern Language Series: Tres
Comedias, by Jacinto Benavente

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Heath's Modern Language Series: Tres Comedias
       Sin querer; De pequenas causas...; Los intereses creados

Author: Jacinto Benavente

Editor: John van Horne

Release Date: February 17, 2009 [EBook #28106]

Language: Spanish

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HEATH'S MODERN LANGUAGE ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Chuck Greif and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net









Heath's Modern Language Series

TRES COMEDIAS

_SIN QUERER_

_DE PEQUEÑAS CAUSAS_...

_LOS INTERESES CREADOS_

POR

JACINTO BENAVENTE

EDITED BY
JOHN VAN HORNE, Ph.D.
UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS

D. C. HEATH & CO., PUBLISHERS
BOSTON NEW YORK CHICAGO

COPYRIGHT, 1918,

BY D. C. HEATH & CO.

2 B 3

Printed in U. S. A.

CONTEMPORARY SPANISH TEXTS

_General Editor_

FEDERICO DE ONÍS

Professor of Spanish Literature,

University of Salamanca and Columbia University




CONTEMPORARY SPANISH TEXTS


=1. Jacinto Benavente: Tres Comedias=, _Sin querer_, _De pequeñas causas_,
_Los intereses creados_. Edited with notes and vocabulary by Professor
JOHN VAN HORNE of the University of Illinois. xxxvi + 189 pages.

=2. Vicente Blasco Ibáñez: La Batalla del Marne= from _Los cuatro jinetes
del Apocalipsis_. Edited with notes and vocabulary by Professor FEDERICO
DE ONÍS of the University of Salamanca and Columbia University. xi + 201
pages.

=3. Gregorio Martínez Sierra: Canción de Cuna.= Edited with notes,
direct-method exercises, and vocabulary by Professor AURELIO M. ESPINOSA
of Stanford University. xxvi + 142 pages.

=4. Juan Ramón Jiménez: Platero y yo=. Edited with notes, direct-method
exercises, and vocabulary by GERTRUDE M. WALSH of the North High School,
Columbus, Ohio. xiv + 136 pages.

=5. Manuel Linares Rivas: El Abolengo=. Edited with direct-method
exercises, notes, and vocabulary by Dr. PAUL G. MILLER, formerly
Commissioner of Education of Porto Rico. xvi + 124 pages.

=6. Hill and Buceta: Antología de cuentos españoles:= Edited with
direct-method exercises, notes, and vocabulary by Professor JOHN M. HILL
of Indiana University, and Professor ERASMO BUCETA of the University of
California. xvi + 257 pages.




ADVERTENCIA GENERAL


Con este volumen iniciamos la publicación de una nueva serie de textos
para el uso general de las clases de español. Intentamos con ella
responder a las nuevas necesidades creadas por el rápido y
extraordinario crecimiento del estudio del español que a través de todo
el país estamos en estos días presenciando. El caudal de textos
utilizado para esta enseñanza necesita ser renovado y aumentado de
acuerdo con las nuevas demandas.

No creemos equivocarnos al interpretar la transformación a que estamos
asistiendo, no sólo como un aumento en el número de estudiantes y en la
intensidad del estudio, sino como un cambio en la dirección y en los
fines de éste. Hasta ahora dominaba una tendencia más bien literaria e
histórica; desde ahora, aun continuada e intensificada ésta, el primer
plano de interés en el estudio del español lo ocupa el interés práctico,
político y comercial. Reconocido este hecho a él debemos ajustar
nuestras normas y a sus necesidades tenemos que subvenir; pero hemos de
apresurarnos a afirmar que entendemos grave error el considerar esos dos
fines como antitéticos. El estudio práctico del español, para ser
verdaderamente práctico y eficaz, requerirá en el mayor grado posible el
conocimiento y el uso de las obras puramente literarias.

La lectura de textos literarios originales de autores españoles será
siempre uno de los modos esenciales de llegar al conocimiento práctico
de la lengua. Será además un insustituible medio de llegar a conocer la
vida, las costumbres, el carácter y el espíritu de esos pueblos con los
que nos ligan lazos múltiples. La transformación a que estamos
asistiendo no deberá pues entenderse en ningún sentido ni en ningún caso
como motivo de exclusión de los textos literarios en la enseñanza; pero
sí habrá seguramente que escoger entre la literatura de esos países la
que más se adapte a las nuevas necesidades. Parece evidente que el
estudio del español se dirige ahora mucho más que antes a las realidades
actuales de los pueblos hispánicos, y que por lo tanto la literatura que
debe ser conocida y utilizada generalmente en las clases debe ser la
literatura de hoy, la literatura actualmente viva, la que representa el
espíritu y los ideales actuales de la gran comunidad hispana.

Se han utilizado con éxito hasta ahora (y se seguirán utilizando)
ciertas manifestaciones literarias españolas pertenecientes sobre todo
al siglo XIX; pero pueden contarse con los dedos de una mano las obras
de autores rigurosamente contemporáneos y las de autores
hispano-americanos que hasta ahora se han puesto en circulación. El gran
caudal de la producción literaria contemporánea--que por otra parte
tiene el interés de ser uno de los momentos más brillantes de la
literatura española--permanece fuera de nuestras clases de español. Y
esto es más grave si se tiene en cuenta que un cambio esencial se ha
llevado a cabo en las postrimerías del siglo XIX en las tendencias y en
los gustos literarios y por lo tanto en el espíritu colectivo, un cambio
tal que significa la aparición de una nueva época claramente distinta y
aun contradictoria de la anterior. Esta época es la que ahora se
encuentra en su momento de plenitud y madurez. Los más de los escritores
del siglo XIX han desaparecido ya, los que aun viven son escritores
retardados en contradicción con el espíritu del tiempo, y la nueva
generación de escritores que surgió a la vida literaria en los últimos
diez años del siglo XIX se encuentra ahora, después de veinte o treinta
años de labor, en la cumbra de su vida y con una gloriosa obra detrás.

El mérito y el valor relativo de los hombres de esa generación ha sido
aquilatado por el público y la crítica españoles durante este tiempo y
algunos de ellos han obtenido una consagración que les da, hasta donde
el juicio contemporáneo puede llegar, el valor y la autoridad de
escritores clásicos. Unos han visto abiertas las puertas de la Real
Academia Española, otros ven sus obras publicadas en ediciones completas
y en selecciones y antologías, todos ellos las han visto traducidas a
las diversas lenguas europeas, y--lo que significa más que nada--todos
ellos cuentan con la reputación, la autoridad y la influencia a través
de la gran comunidad espiritual de los pueblos que hablan español.

Creemos llegado el momento de ofrecer a nuestros estudiantes lo mejor de
este caudal literario, y para ello hemos concebido la publicación de una
serie constituida por un número limitado de textos que sean ejemplos de
primer orden de los diversos autores y de las diversas manifestaciones
literarias modernas en España y en Hispano-América y que al mismo tiempo
reúnan aquellas condiciones que los hagan aptos para la enseñanza
práctica del idioma en nuestras escuelas y colegios.

La selección cuidadosa de los textos irá acompañada de ciertas
innovaciones en la edición que tiendan a darle mayor eficacia práctica.
Cada texto llevará una breve introducción escrita en español claro, puro
y sencillo, destinada a ser leída en las clases por los alumnos mismos
como parte del texto. Los profesores comprenderán la importancia que
tiene preparar al alumno para la inteligencia de un texto y un autor que
forman parte de las realidades actuales de los países cuya vida se
pretende dar a conocer. El Sr. Onís, director de la serie, escribirá
para ella dichas introducciones.

Las notas tendrán un carácter práctico; se pretenderá en ellas no sólo
resolver las dificultades gramaticales y de significación, sino dar a
conocer el valor que, respecto al uso de la lengua comúnmente hablada,
tiene la lengua literaria empleada en el texto. Muchas de las obras irán
acompañadas de ejercicios adecuados al grado de enseñanza a que la obra
se considere destinada. En todo caso la obra irá acompañada de un
vocabulario en el que se explicará suficientemente la significación y el
valor usual del caudal lexicográfico, el cual, por su modernidad, ofrece
muchas voces comunes que aun no han sido recogidas por los
diccionarios.




CONTENTS


PREFACE

INTRODUCTION

JACINTO BENAVENTE

SIN QUERER

DE PEQUEÑAS CAUSAS

LOS INTERESES CREADOS

NOTES

VOCABULARY




PREFACE


The text of this edition is taken from Benavente's _Teatro_, Librería de
los Sucesores de Hernando, Madrid; _Sin querer_ comes from vol. 4, 2d
ed., 1913; _De pequeñas causas_... from vol. 18, 1909; _Los intereses
creados_ from vol. 16, 4th ed., 1914. A few obvious misprints are
corrected; accentuation is made to conform to the regulations in the
1914 edition of the Spanish Academy Dictionary; punctuation is
unchanged. The text proper is complete except for two slight omissions
from _De pequeñas causas_..., both of which are mentioned in the notes.
_Los intereses creados_ is chosen as one of the finest of Benavente's
plays, and the one best suited to class use; the two shorter pieces are
included to give an idea of the author's more normal manner. Although
_De pequeñas causas_... was produced on the stage after _Los intereses
creados_, it precedes it in this edition in order that the long play may
stand at the end of the volume.

It is believed that these plays can be read to greatest advantage after
students have had one year of Spanish. The Notes and Vocabulary have
been prepared with that in mind, as much material as possible being
placed in the Vocabulary rather than in the Notes. However, in the
present dearth of good elementary texts, the book might be used toward
the end of the first year; it is hoped that the vocabulary is adequate
for such a purpose. The introduction aims to give as complete an account
as space permits, of Benavente's dramatic career. Therefore,
non-dramatic works, such as _De sobremesa_, are treated in much more
summary fashion than they deserve.

The editor wishes to express his thanks to the author, Sr. D. Jacinto
Benavente, for kind permission to edit these plays; to his father for
careful reading and correction of introduction, notes and vocabulary; to
Professor John D. Fitz-Gerald, and Dr. Homero Serís, of the University
of Illinois, and to Mr. José G. García, of New York City, founder of the
newspaper _Las Novedades_, for valuable suggestions on difficult points.
Dean Roscoe Pound, of the Law School of Harvard University, kindly
furnished suggestions as to the probable interpretation of Emiliano and
Triberiano.




INTRODUCTION


=Benavente's Life.=--Jacinto Benavente y Martínez or Jacinto Benavente, as
he is commonly known, was born in Madrid on August 12th, 1866. He
attended school in his native city, studied law at the University there,
and finally abandoned his thought of a legal career in order to devote
himself to dramatic literature. Much intercourse with varied types of
people has supplied him with the knowledge of human nature evident in
his dramatic productions. Although he has traveled to a considerable
extent, Madrid has been the center of nearly all his literary activity,
and it is impossible to identify him with any other place. The principal
events of his life have been associated with the theater, and are best
reviewed in connection with the study of his dramatic career.

Mariano Benavente, the father of the author, was a physician and
specialist in children's diseases, who came originally from Murcia. His
influence upon his son is perhaps noticeable in the respect shown by the
latter for the medical profession and in his fondness for children.[i.1]

=Devotion to the Stage.=--In an interview published in the Madrid
periodical _La Esfera_ (in 1916) Benavente tells us that his affection
for the theater was awakened at a very early age. He says that as a boy
he took delight in fashioning little theatrical pieces in which he could
act, and that his enthusiasm was aroused by the presentation rather than
by the composition of such pieces. Even recently[i.2] he declared that he
would rather have been a great actor than a writer of plays. In fact, he
has been known to appear on the stage with the actress María Tubau and
in some of his own productions, one of which was _Sin querer_.

Benavente is a peculiarly natural product of the stage. No one could
give himself more whole-heartedly to his profession than he has done. He
is interested in all theatrical matters: in the writing and presentation
of plays, in actors, in the Madrid public which he praises and censures
in turn, in the history and criticism of the drama, in aesthetic
principles, in the relation between good art and financial success; in
short, no detail escapes his notice. He likes to work with his
audiences, to please and to amuse them, yet he does not lose sight of
the serious mission of the drama. No outside interests have ever taken
him for any considerable time from his true vocation. He is an excellent
and well-rounded, but at the same time a delightfully spontaneous
product of Spanish dramatic art.

=Minor Works.=--We are informed in the interview already mentioned that
Benavente was forced to write several plays before he composed one that
was accepted. In characteristically ironical style he asserts that it
was not hard for him to gain a hearing, because his father was the
physician of the theatrical manager to whom he made application. His
earliest models, according to his own statement, were Shakespeare and
Echegaray. Veneration for the great English dramatist is apparent in
Benavente's entire career. The influence is perhaps most directly seen
in the _Teatro fantástico_, the first in date of his published writings
(1892). Short sketches and prose dialogues are contained in two other
early volumes, _Figulinas_ and _Vilanos_. A fourth book containing
youthful writings and entitled _Cartas de mujeres_ is a series of
letters meant to illustrate the thoughts and the epistolary style of
women. These letters have been much praised in Spain for their literary
workmanship and for their insight into the feminine heart, a faculty
which has always been considered one of the clearest manifestations of
Benavente's genius.[i.3]

Other productions distinct from the central body of Benavente's dramatic
works (the _Teatro_) are _De sobremesa_ and the _Teatro del pueblo_. The
former, a collection in five volumes of weekly articles composed for
_Los lunes_ of _El Imparcial_ (1908-1912), is the principal source for
its author's views on dramatic criticism and on worldly affairs in
general. The _Teatro del pueblo_ is a series of papers on subjects
connected with the stage. Both these productions will be discussed after
a review of the plays.

=List of Plays.=--The following titles are encountered, in the order here
followed, in the twenty-two volumes of the _Teatro_. The date of the
_estreno_ (first performance) and a brief description are given with
each title.[i.4]

  1894 October 6th. _El nido ajeno_ (comedy, three acts).
  1896 October 21st. _Gente conocida_ (scenes of modern life, four acts).
  1897 February 13th. _El marido de la Téllez_ (comedy sketch, one act).
       February 27th. _De alivio_ (monologue).
       October 31st. _Don Juan_ (translated from Molière).
       November 30th. _La farándula_ (comedy, two acts).
  1898 November 7th. _La comida de las fieras_ (comedy, three acts).
       December 28th, _Teatro feminista_ (farce comedy with music, one act).
  1899 March 11th. _Cuento de amor_ (from Shakespeare's "Twelfth Night").
       May 4th. _Operación quirúrgica_ (comedy, one act).
       December 7th. _Despedida cruel_ (comedy, one act).
  1900 March 31st. _La gata de Angora_ (comedy, four acts).
       April 6th. _Viaje de instrucción_ (zarzuela).
       July 15th. _Por la herida_ (drama, one act).
  1901 January 18th. _Modas_ (sketch, one act).
       January 19th. _Lo cursi_ (comedy, three acts).
       March 3rd. _Sin querer_ (comedy sketch, one act).
       July 19th. _Sacrificios_ (drama, three acts).
       October 8th. _La gobernadora_ (comedy, three acts).
       November 12th. _El primo Román_ (comedy, three acts).
  1902 February 24th. _Amor de amar_ (comedy, two acts).
       March 17th. _¡Libertad!_ (translated from the Catalan of Rusiñol).
       April 18th. _El tren de los maridos_ (farce comedy, two acts).
       December 2nd. _Alma triunfante_ (drama, three acts).
       December 19th. _El automóvil_ (comedy, two acts).
  1903 March 17th. _La noche del sábado_ (stage romance, five divisions).
       No date. _Los favoritos_ (adapted from episode in Shakespeare's
       "Much Ado About Nothing").
       March 23rd. _El hombrecito_ (comedy, three acts).
       October 29th. _Mademoiselle de Belle-Isle_
       (translated from Dumas Pére).
       October 26th. _Por qué se ama_ (comedy, one act).
       November 20th. _Al natural_ (comedy, two acts).
       December 9th. _La casa de la dicha_ (drama, one act).
       March 16th. _El dragón de fuego_ (drama, three acts).
  1904 March 15th. _Richelieu_ (translated from Bulwer-Lytton).
       No date. _La princesa Bebé_ (scenes of modern life, four acts).
       March 3rd. _No fumadores_ (farce, one act).
  1905 April 13th. _Rosas de otoño_ (comedy, three acts).
       No date. _Buena boda_ (based on Augier).
       July 18th. _El susto de la condesa_ (dialogue).
       July 22nd. _Cuento inmoral_ (monologue).
       December 23rd. _La sobresalienta_ (farce with music).
       December 1st. _Los malhechores del bien_ (comedy, two acts).
       December 24th. _Las cigarras hormigas_ (farce comedy, three acts).
  1906 February 22nd. _Más fuerte que el amor_ (drama, four acts).
       No date. _Manón Lescaut_ (adapted from the Abbé Prévost).
  1907 February 8th. _Los buhos_ (comedy, three acts).
       February 21st. _Abuela y nieta_ (dialogue).
       No date. _La princesa sin corazón_ (fairy-tale).
       January 10th. _El amor asusta_ (comedy, one act).
       March 16th. _La copa encantada_ (adapted from Ariosto,
       one act zarzuela).
       November 7th. _Los ojos de los muertos_ (drama, three acts).
       No date. _La historia de Otelo_ (comedy, one act).
       No date. _La sonrisa de Gioconda_ (comedy sketch, one act).
       No date. _El último minué_ (comedy sketch, one act).
       September 21st. _Todos somos unos_ (farce with music).
       December 9th. _Los intereses creados_ (comedy of masks).
  1908 February 22nd. _Señora ama_ (comedy, three acts).
       October 19th. _El marido de su viuda_ (comedy, one act).
       November 10th. _La fuerza bruta_ (comedy, one act).
       March 14th. _De pequeñas causas_... (comedy sketch, one act).
       December 23rd. _Hacia la verdad_ (scenes of modern life,
       three divisions).
  1909 January 20th. _Por las nubes_ (comedy, two acts).
       April 10th. _De cerca_ (comedy, one act).
       No date. _¡A ver qué hace un hombre!_ (dramatic sketch, one act).
       October 14th. _La escuela de las princesas_ (comedy, three acts).
       December 1st. _La señorita se aburre_ (based on Tennyson, one act).
       December 20th. _El príncipe que todo lo aprendió en los libros_
       (fairy-tale, two acts).
       December 20th. _Ganarse la vida_ (fairy-tale, one act).
  1910 January 27th. _El nietecito_ (from Grimm's Fairy Tales, one act).
  1911 November 9th. _La losa de los sueños_ (comedy, two acts).
  1913 December 12th. _La malquerida_ (drama, three acts).
  1914 March 25th. _El destino manda_ (from Hervieu).
  1915 March 4th. _El collar de estrellas_ (comedy, four acts).
       No date. _La verdad_ (dialogue).
       December 22nd. _La propia estimación_ (comedy, two acts).
  1916 February 14th. _Campo de armiño_ (comedy, three acts).
       May 4th. _La ciudad alegre y confiada_ (second part of
     _Los intereses creados_).[i.5]

It will be observed that the _Teatro_ includes nearly all varieties of
dramatic output: one, two, three, and four act plays, monologues,
dialogues, translations, adaptations, zarzuelas, farces, fairy-dramas,
comedies, and tragedies.

=First Period.=--Between 1894 and 1901 Benavente produced eighteen plays
on the Madrid stage. They represent, in a general way, the first phase
of his dramatic career. The element that characterizes them most
conspicuously is satire. Benavente holds up to scorn Spanish
aristocratic society of the present day. He introduces to his audiences
a succession of types whose failings and foibles are displayed with
merciless precision. The author himself is concealed behind the array of
personages whom he presents to the public.

Occasionally the reader will encounter a noble character isolated in the
midst of selfish, amusement-seeking men, frivolous women, scheming
parents and thoughtless sybarites. Such types, however, are
comparatively rare; their function is to bring into stronger relief the
general worthlessness of other characters. A woman is usually chosen to
play the part of strength and virtue. This is by no means accidental.
Study of Benavente reveals him as a defender of women; not at all their
blind worshiper, it is true, but distinctly a sympathizer with their
trials and problems.

It is to be noted that no character in any of these early plays is
represented as utterly bad. That would be contrary to the author's
conception of human nature. Benavente insists that no man or woman can
be regarded as entirely perverse or entirely admirable. Although his
attitude is nearly always objective, and his general method satirical or
ironical, he evinces upon occasion the ability to sympathize with the
very weaknesses of the persons whom he ridicules. If we will try to
forget for a moment that Benavente is making fun of an idle aristocracy
vainly seeking relief from boredom, we shall understand that we are
brought face to face with individuals drawn from real life, whose
principal attributes are a discouraging mediocrity and inability to rise
above a certain level.

=Originality.=--Benavente has been accused of plagiarism in his early
plays. The charge has been brought, particularly with reference to
_Gente conocida_, that he borrowed the character of the strong woman
from Ibsen. His reply to this censure argues that there was no conscious
imitation. He declares that Henri Lavedan served as a model as much as
any writer can be said to have done so. That is to say, Benavente wished
to unfold a picture of life as it is, in a series of photographic
scenes.[i.6] Such a species of play has always been preferred by him. In
days of more mature power, when he was writing with a more obvious
purpose, he lamented that he was no longer doing what was pleasing to
him, but was catering to the desires of others.

It may be gathered from what has just been said that there is not a
strong element of plot in these plays of Spanish society. The object is
rather delineation of character. Among the longer plays _Gente
conocida_, _La comida de las fieras_ and _Lo cursi_ have perhaps
received the greatest attention. _Lo cursi_ is an excellent example of a
skilfully constructed society comedy. Some of the shorter pieces, such
as _Operación quirúrgica_, _Despedida cruel_, and _Por la herida_ are
very effective. A glance at the list of plays shows that _Don Juan_,
_La farándula_, _Cuento de amor_, and _Viaje de instrucción_ are
unconnected in subject matter with the characteristic type just
discussed.

It may not be amiss to call attention to Benavente's reason for choosing
the aristocracy as a butt of ridicule. That he is not a mere vulgar
reviler of rich and prominent people is shown by the following remarks,
made in the course of a panegyric of the interest of the nobility in
agriculture.

"If at times I have lashed our aristocracy, it was not on account of
prejudice against it, but because, called upon to satirize, and
considering the natural and roguish desire of the public to laugh at
somebody's cost, it seemed to me more charitable to excite laughter at
the expense of those who enjoy many advantages in life, rather than at
the expense of the humble who toil and who suffer privations of all
kinds. It has never seemed to me that hunger is a fit subject for
laughter, and we know that in half of our comic plays hunger is the
principal cause of merriment."[i.7]

=Transition.=--Many discussions and criticisms of Benavente indicate that
he is known principally as a composer of plays that deal with society,
written objectively to depict life as it is, without any betrayal of the
author's opinions. As we pass beyond the year 1901, we realize that a
change is taking place. This does not mean that pictures of life in the
upper classes are to constitute an unimportant part of Benavente's
_teatro_. As has been noted, they are especially congenial to his
artistic sense. However, the later periods of his career give evidence
of ever-expanding powers and of increasing versatility. The early type
of play does not disappear, but it becomes only one of a number of
different _genres_, all of which are connected by their author's
keenness of observation, fidelity to life, genius for irony and
universal human interest.

=1901-1904.=--No convincing bond of union is found in the eighteen plays
written in the first three years of the present century. Four
translations and adaptations are encountered. The society play is
continued in _El automóvil_ and _El hombrecito_, although the latter
shows elements of the problem drama. With scarcely any change of method
the scene of action is shifted from Spanish to royal and international
society in _La noche del sábado_ and _La princesa Bebé_. _El primo
Román_, _Al natural_, and _La casa de la dicha_, although differing
widely in details, evidence a broader view of human nature. Free rein is
given to the spirit of fun in _El tren de los maridos_ and _No
fumadores_. Serious steps toward a thesis drama are evident in _Alma
triunfante_ and _Por qué se ama_. But the two most striking plays of the
period are _La gobernadora_ and _El dragón de fuego_.

_=La gobernadora.=_--In this play the spectator or reader is introduced to
prominent political characters in a provincial town. The successive
incidents show how influence may be brought to bear upon an
administrative official from a variety of undesirable sources. The
governor's wife, a shrewd, capable woman, persuades her husband to use
his authority against his better judgment. The moneyed classes, devoted
to reaction, use intrigues of all kinds to force him to forbid the
performance of a play that extols liberal tendencies. The working
classes attempt a riot in order to compel him not to interfere with the
spectacle. The details of the plot need not be given. One thing,
however, deserves to be mentioned--the brilliancy of the scenes in which
a great number of characters are shown on the stage at the same time.
One scene brings before our eyes a crowd collected in a café, and
another shows us the spectators at a bull-fight. Benavente portrays
faithfully and vividly the gayety inherent in the outdoor life of the
races of Southern Europe. He reminds us of the splendid pictures that
mark some of the best plays of Goldoni.[i.8]

=Political Ideas.=--Benavente has more than once called himself a
reactionary in politics. Unfortunately we do not know just what he means
by reaction. He speaks of the folly of endeavoring to correct abuses by
law, but just when he appears to be on the point of committing himself,
a satirical or ironical remark leaves us in doubt as to his real
convictions. In recent utterances he has demonstrated greater
willingness to discuss current problems from a severely logical point of
view. In many respects he is a modern thinker; projects for the gradual
improvement of Spanish and world-wide ills meet with his unqualified
approval. Unfortunately, or perhaps fortunately, he is not always
consistent in his desire to see things accomplished without governmental
interference; for instance, he favors state control of the theater.

_=El dragón de fuego.=_--No better example could be given of the
difficulty of determining Benavente's political notions than _El dragón
de fuego_. It is at the same time his most serious, most mysterious,
and, in the opinion of some critics, his most pessimistic work. The plot
is as follows: A certain civilized country called Sirlandia has gained
control over the uncivilized people of Nirván, thereby outdistancing the
rival powers, Franconia and Suavia (the names may be applied to Western
European nations as each reader sees fit). The emissaries of
civilization are a general, a merchant, and a clergyman, who symbolize
arms, money, and spirituality. The Europeans uphold upon the throne a
puppet-king, Dani-Sar, who is the protagonist of the play and whose
character is in every respect admirable. His weakness and his strength
are those of a man removed from western civilization. Although in love
with a maiden, Sita, he surrenders her to his brother Duraní, whom he
thinks she loves. Foreigners and natives are alike dear to him, but he
falls victim to the selfish and cruel policy of civilization. When the
Sirlandians discover that Dani-Sar is not a pliant tool, they dethrone
him and make his brother king. Dani-Sar is taken to Sirlandia, where he
is held in custody. Outwardly he receives good treatment, but his heart
is eaten away by loneliness, despair, and homesickness. He cannot endure
the cold climate of the north and the hypocritical hospitality of his
captors.

In this remarkable play Benavente is well-nigh as inscrutable as the
sphinx. He recognizes the power of civilization and the inevitability of
its advance. Yet he seems to value even more highly the gentle, noble
patriotism of his hero. Other savages he describes as depraved and
superstitious, although brave and in love with liberty. The whole
composition is a masterly objective treatment of the unavoidable
conflict between an advanced and a backward race.

=Thesis Plays.=--Those who are familiar only with Benavente's earlier
manner can scarcely conceive of him as the author of a problem or thesis
drama. A tendency to deny the presence of a thesis may be observed on
the part of certain reviewers and critics. But careful reading of the
plays and consideration of their chronological development disclose that
at one period in his career Benavente's mind was busy with the problems
of married life in such a way that he produced something very close to
the drama with a purpose. We may trace the beginning of this tendency
back to some of the first plays in which a strong woman is introduced as
a foil to her worthless companions. Later, _Alma triunfante_ is a
glorification of a woman's generosity of soul, and _Por qué se ama_
describes the influence of compassion in causing a woman to cling
through thick and thin to the object of her affection.

In 1905 and 1906 appeared the plays that best illustrate a purposeful
treatment of conjugal relations. Benavente's prime object is to idealize
feminine love and constancy. A second theme, second in prominence only
to the first, is a glorification of true love itself. The topic of
compassion, already referred to, is carried to its greatest extreme in
the gloomy but powerful tragedy _Más fuerte que el amor_.

_=Rosas de otoño.=_--The most striking of the problem plays is _Rosas de
otoño_. Some critics who deny a thesis elsewhere admit it in this
production. The heroine, Isabel, is married to Gonzalo, an unfaithful
husband, who gives no heed to his wife's strictures, but persists in
asserting that she is sacred to him in spite of everything. Gonzalo's
daughter by an earlier marriage, María Antonia, marries a certain Pepe,
whose actions are not above criticism. Yet Gonzalo defends him. Baseless
rumors are circulated against the fair fame of María Antonia, and Pepe
wishes to divorce her. Again Gonzalo defends him. This is too much for
Isabel, who chides her husband so severely that she really succeeds in
breaking through his selfishness. Although he endeavors to defend a
feeble cause by an argument in favor of delinquent men, it is clear that
his heart has been touched, and that Isabel, after long years of patient
resignation, is destined to enjoy her "Autumn Roses."

The prevailing gloom of _Rosas de otoño_ is relieved by certain trivial
and even comic incidents on the part of minor characters, so arranged
that they do not appear out of place. Moreover, Benavente is not too
partisan; although frankly defending a cause, as a follower of
Shakespeare he cannot forget that he is depicting human life. He gives
due weight to the partial justice in the selfish arguments of Gonzalo
and Pepe, and does not insist that they are utterly depraved.
Heedlessness and egoism make them yield to temptation, but Gonzalo never
overlooks the fact that his wife's honor must be respected and
treasured.

Notwithstanding the good qualities of _Rosas de otoño_ and kindred
pieces, the play dealing with more or less conventional marital problems
can scarcely be regarded as characteristic of Benavente. He is probably
more successful in other directions.

_=Los malhechores del bien.=_--No other play of Benavente has provoked so
great an outcry as _Los malhechores del bien_. On the surface it is a
clever comedy containing an arraignment of misguided charity. It was
received by the audience as anti-religious propaganda. On the night of
its first performance many people left the theater by way of protest. It
does not seem necessary to regard a dramatist as anti-clerical because
he censures and ridicules the abuses and the patronizing attitude of
religious organizations. The fact that they are religious is really
accidental. The fault lies in the frailty of human nature. One Spanish
reviewer very sensibly treats the play as a simple comedy and deprecates
the storm of disapproval that greeted its appearance.[i.9]

It is worth noting that side by side with serious efforts Benavente
produced between 1904 and 1906 four pieces marked exclusively by the
search for comic effect. Especially amusing is _Las cigarras hormigas_,
the longest member of the _Teatro_, a rollicking three act comedy,
literally crammed with fun from beginning to end.

=Period of Maturity.=--_Los buhos_ was first performed in February, 1907,
and _La malquerida_ in December, 1913. To the seven years between these
dates belong twenty-five theatrical pieces that reveal Benavente as a
mature, confident, versatile dramatist. So perplexing is the succession
of different types of plays that they can be logically discussed only by
disregarding chronology and making divisions according to subject
matter.

=Moral Tendency.=--Prepared as a reader might be, after perusal of the
problem plays, to anticipate further changes, he could scarcely expect
from Benavente's pen simple sketches written with no other aim than to
uphold humble virtues. Yet in some cases that is exactly what we find. A
definite moral tone is observable in a large portion of Benavente's
recent output. _Los buhos_ is a beautiful treatment of the pure
affection entertained by two scholars, father and son, for two friends
who are mother and daughter. _Por las nubes_ suggests emigration to
South America as a remedy for the struggling middle classes; in this
play there is a resort to the expedient of making one of the characters
(a physician) a mouth-piece for the author's opinions. _¡A ver qué hace
un hombre!_ is a plea for the unemployed workman. _Hacia la verdad_
furnishes a eulogy of simple pleasures. _De cerca_ is a literary gem
that shows how the distrust existing between rich and poor may be
overcome if they can learn to understand the common humanity that binds
them. _La fuerza bruta_ and _La losa de los sueños_ glorify the spirit
of sacrifice.

At first sight it seems as if Benavente's whole theory of art had been
revolutionized. The key to the solution of the problem is in the pages
of _De sobremesa_. In his weekly articles he frequently discusses
conditions of wretchedness in the world about him. He suggests practical
remedies for the alleviation of misery among the poor and in the middle
classes. He evinces such a spirit of commiseration for human woes that
no one can wonder that his natural feelings of sympathy and his desire
to benefit his fellow men are reflected in his dramas. Thus it is that
we find intensely moral plays coming from the hand of the man who wrote
in the preface to the standard edition of his works: "I love art above
all things, but all that I have attained in my works has been only a
vain longing of my infinite love."

=Plays for Children.=--A passion for the welfare and happiness of children
is one of the keynotes of Benavente's existence. In periodical writings
he maintains that the young are neglected in Spain, that they receive a
miserable education, and that the poor are wont to regard those children
who die young as truly fortunate. Yet he feels that the most important
element in the future improvement of the race is the careful upbringing
of the newer generations. In company with other people Benavente long
agitated the founding of a theater for children. His efforts were at
last crowned with success, and he himself wrote for the new institution
_El príncipe que todo lo aprendió en los libros_, _Ganarse la vida_, and
_El nietecito_. He endeavored, with considerable success, to combine
fairy legends, playful imagination, and educational value. Unfortunately
the theater seems to have been a failure; its existence was limited to
about one year.

=Romantic Plays.=--Benavente has always possessed a vein of poetry or of
romance that makes him take delight in pure fancy. More than once in _De
sobremesa_ he defends works of imagination. In his own career the
tendency can be traced back to the _Teatro fantástico_, and it is
presumably connected with veneration of Shakespeare. Thus it is that we
find among recent productions, not only the children's plays but _La
princesa sin corazón_, _La copa encantada_, _El último minué_, and other
flights of fancy. The inspiration that brought forth _Los intereses_
creados may perhaps be assigned to the same source.[i.10]

=Miscellanies.=--It must not be supposed that recent years have witnessed
a decline on the part of Benavente in power of irony and observation of
character. Not only are these qualities present in nearly all his plays,
but they are predominant in some. _Abuela y nieta_ is a delightful
character sketch. _De pequeñas causas_... is reminiscent of the earliest
plays. _Los ojos de los muertos_ is a gloomy tragedy of unhappy marital
relations. And so we might continue with other scattered titles.

_=Señora ama and La malquerida.=_--To the period now being discussed
belong the two most striking (from the point of view of tendencies) of
Benavente's latter-day achievements, _Señora ama_ and _La malquerida_.
They carry us to rural districts and plunge us into an inferno of
ignorance, corruption, and vice. The author of these tragic histories
has no illusions about the innocence of the country. Benavente is
reported to have said that he liked _Señora ama_ better than any other
of his plays. The verdict of public and critics has been in favor of the
companion piece. One critic, in particular, has used _La malquerida_ as
an argument to place Benavente among the really great masters of the
world's literature.[i.11]

_La malquerida_ is a tragedy with a unified plot; the end of each act
forms a climax, while the whole leads to a final crisis. A drama with
the plot hinging upon a complicated series of incidents was about the
only thing lacking to round out Benavente's _teatro_. It may now be
claimed that he has cultivated with success practically every variety of
composition that might reasonably be attempted in modern times for a
modern audience.

=Analysis.=--The scene of _La malquerida_ is laid among country people in
fairly easy circumstances. Raimunda, the leading female character, is
married to Esteban.[i.12] She has a daughter, Acacia, from a former
marriage, and one of her chief desires is that her husband and daughter
be on good terms. To her disappointment, Acacia ever since childhood has
shown an aversion toward her stepfather, too strong to be overcome by
Esteban's kindness and by the many presents that he has brought to her
upon various occasions.

At the time of the opening scene of the play, Acacia is betrothed to
Faustino, son of a neighboring farmer, Eusebio. She had previously been
engaged to her cousin, Norberto, but the engagement had been broken for
no obvious reason. One night, just after a visit in company with his
father to the house of his fiancée, Faustino is murdered; shortly
afterwards the first act ends.

The community is aroused, and the finger of suspicion is directed
against the unfortunate cousin, Norberto. Especially do Eusebio and his
remaining sons believe him guilty, and when justice, on account of lack
of proof, does not detain Norberto, they determine to take their own
revenge. They lie in wait for him as he is coming to see Raimunda, fall
upon him, and wound him. He is carried to Raimunda's home, and there
tells her a secret and also some horrible rumors that are being
circulated in the community. He discloses that Esteban had long been in
love with his stepdaughter Acacia, and that he could not bear the idea
of losing her. Therefore he had threatened Norberto with death if he
should insist upon marrying his cousin; that was the true reason for the
breaking of the engagement. Later, when Acacia was betrothed to an
outsider, Esteban could not use threats, but he was driven nearly crazy
at the thought of being abandoned by his stepdaughter. He talked matters
over with his servant El Rubio, and inflamed him to such an extent that
he murdered Faustino.

Suspicion has been aroused by certain unguarded statements made by El
Rubio while under the influence of wine. The whole community begins to
suspect Esteban of the crime.

At the beginning of the last act Esteban and El Rubio have gone away,
apparently with a vague idea of flight, but they soon return to face
justice. Esteban regrets having been an accomplice in murder; El Rubio
offers to take the responsibility if Esteban will agree to secure his
liberty after a short interval. At this moment Raimunda enters, and
accuses her husband of the crime. Together they review their life of the
past few years, she criticizing him and he defending himself. He says
that he has not been able to endure it; that the presence of the girl
Acacia has always made his blood boil; that he has tried to resist, but
in vain. If Acacia when a child had only called him father and had loved
him, all would have been well. Raimunda takes pity on him when he says
this, and assures him that they will live happily after sending Acacia
to the house of a relative. Thereupon Acacia enters, and shows hatred
and scorn for her stepfather. He is saddened by her attitude, and chides
her. Raimunda begs her to call him father, before he gives himself up to
justice. Then Acacia can no longer restrain the feelings that she has so
long concealed from everybody. Instead of father she calls him Esteban;
she embraces him, and Raimunda realizes the final truth. Her daughter
has always loved her stepfather. Infuriated, she calls upon everybody
within hearing, and tells the dreadful secret. Esteban tries to escape
with Acacia, in order to enjoy his newly discovered love. When he finds
that he is unable to get away, he fatally wounds his wife, Raimunda.
Fatality again places Acacia, the "Ill-beloved," on the side of her
mother, and this time forever; Raimunda prepares to die, satisfied with
her final victory.

=The Latest Plays.=--The _estreno_ of a play of Benavente is now one of
the principal events of the theatrical year in Madrid. His reputation is
securely established, and the public looks to him for the great events
of the season. It is true, perhaps, that no play since 1913 has reached
the heights achieved by _La malquerida_ and other masterpieces. The
keynote of _El collar de estrellas_, _La propia estimación_, and _Campo
de armiño_ seems to be the building of character. Nowhere else, perhaps,
is the author quite so insistent in setting a standard of human virtue.
As a natural consequence he paints some personages who come perilously
close to being angels or villains. The tendency is quite in line with
the progressive development of Benavente's dramatic and intellectual
life. Possibly his art has suffered slightly from a desire to exert a
good moral influence, but his reflections have become correspondingly
more profound and valuable. Moreover, we must not forget his astonishing
versatility. He can stop in the midst of a series of didactic plays and
compose something like _Los intereses creados_ or _La malquerida_.[i.13]
Therefore it is fair to assert that each new step in the evolution of
his _teatro_ adds to what has gone before without supplanting it.

=Replies to Criticism.=--Certain criticisms of methods employed by
Benavente have been noticed. Replies made by him to unfavorable comment
are contained in the following statements:

"If any remorse troubles my artistic conscience, it is because I have
often sacrificed art to preaching; but in Spain... it is necessary to
preach so much, and the theater is such a good pulpit!"[i.14]

"And what shall I say of myself? I am the same man that I was in 1897;
even my concessions to middle-class sentimentalism, as I could
demonstrate with texts, do not belong to the present day alone. And why
not? An author has the whole work in which to say what he feels and what
he thinks; later, in the conclusion, seeing that life does not conclude
anything, why not please the public? If this public, with or without
concessions, had not been on my side from the beginning of my dramatic
career, could I have continued to present plays? The public was my real
support against the critics, who were almost unanimous in affirming that
that was not drama."[i.15]

"No one is more opposed than I am to giving scandal either in books or
in conduct. I shall never defend my works as literary works, but I will
defend them as works of spotless morality. If in any of them there is
anything that may seem sinful in appearance, it is not I who am
speaking; it is some person for whose morality I am not responsible. I
am accustomed to allow the personages of my works to express themselves
according to their character and temperament. Unfortunately these evil
characters are the ones who are always closest to the truth. Only God
and my artistic conscience know that it is necessary for us to lie when
we wish to moralize."[i.16]

"My life as a dramatic author cannot be remembered without remembering
Rosario Pino, the ideal interpreter of so many comedies of mine when my
comedies were pleasing only to myself; whereas at present they are
pleasing to many people, and not at all to me. And I am more mournful
now at not being in accord with the applause, than I was then, when I
could not agree with the censure."[i.17]

_=Teatro del pueblo.=_--The opinions of Benavente on various technical and
critical matters related to the stage are found in a book of essays
called _Teatro del pueblo_ after the first article, which is an argument
in favor of the establishment of a free theater for the people. Many of
the themes discussed in the book allow the author to give free play to
satire and irony. He criticizes savagely theatrical conditions in Spain,
favors translations, upholds moving-pictures, one act plays, vaudeville,
the circus, photography, etc., at the expense of the legitimate stage;
but through it all there appears a man fond of poetry, interested in the
lower classes and in children, an artist and a clear-headed man of
affairs.

_=De sobremesa.=_--It remains only to describe the impression made by
Benavente in matters unconnected with the theater. The periodical
writings contain more about dramatic criticism than about any other one
topic, but they also include a great many discussions of themes of
national and world-wide interest; they were naturally affected by the
current events of the years 1908-1912. The author of _De sobremesa_
shows himself to be a typical product of modern life. Possessing the
cultivation characteristic of intellectual life in a modern European
capital, his mind is encumbered by few, if any, illusions. He is both
satirical and practical. Irony and hatred for Spanish abuses do not
prevent him from exhibiting a pure and noble patriotism. Cosmopolitan as
he may be in theories, his nature is essentially and intensely Spanish.
It is a genuine comfort to find that the scientific observer of human
nature, the man who can make acute comments on the most diversified
subjects, can occasionally give way to a noble passion, and even to a
pardonable prejudice; not too often, but just often enough to prove that
he is human. One cannot turn away from Benavente without feeling that he
has been enriched by communion with a master spirit and benefited by
association with a broad, clear-thinking, sympathetic nature.

=Conclusion.=--When an author is still alive, and especially when he is in
the prime of life, it is difficult to pass judgment upon him. The future
may show an evolution hitherto unsuspected. As far as can be told at
present, Benavente's position is unassailable. He has been admitted to
the Spanish Academy, he is recognized as one of the leading dramatists
of Spain, and many consider him the foremost figure in the modern
Spanish theater. Before the outbreak of the European War he was almost
universally admired in his native country. The bitterness of
international discussion has crept into dramatic criticism, but such a
situation should be only temporary. There is every reason to expect that
future historians of Spanish literature will reserve a post of honor for
Jacinto Benavente.

JOHN VAN HORNE


FOOTNOTES:

[1] Cf. _De sobremesa_, vol. II, p. 86, "Por algo soy hijo de quien
mereció el nombre de 'médico de los niños.'"

[2] In the interview just mentioned.

[3] Cf. Juan Valera, _Obras completas_, vol. XXXI, pp. 15-23.

[4] It must be remembered that the word _comedia_ (comedy) is used in
Spanish for a play with a happy ending; the subject matter may be very
serious; similarly a _drama_ denotes a play with a sad ending. Spanish
nomenclature is followed in translation, except in a few cases where the
word 'farce' is added for clearness. It will be observed that the order
of plays is not quite chronological in some cases. Moreover, there are
no dates of production for a few pieces; this means that some are,
through oversight, not dated in the printed Spanish edition, others were
produced privately, and still others were never represented on the
stage.

[5] Not yet included in the published volumes of the _Teatro_.

[6] See the _Autocrítica_ prefixed to _Gente conocida_, _Teatro_, vol.
2, pp. 85-87.

[7] _De sobremesa_, vol. I, p. 65.

[8] The most famous Italian writer of comedies (1707-1793).

[9] E. Gómez de Baquero, in _La España moderna_, Jan. 1906, pp. 160-166.

[10] An account of _Los intereses creados_ is incorporated in the Notes.

[11] José Rogerio Sánchez, in _Estudio crítico acerca de La malquerida,
drama de Jacinto Benavente_, Madrid, 1913.

[12] At the _estreno_ the part of Raimunda was played by María Guerrero,
and that of Esteban by Fernando Díaz de Mendoza; these eminent artists,
whose company is the most celebrated in Spain, have appeared in several
of Benavente's plays.

[13] Cf. _La ciudad alegre y confiada_, of which a brief notice is given
in the body of the Notes, in connection with _Los intereses creados_.

[14] _De sobremesa_, II, 16.

[15] _De sobremesa_, II, 176-179; said in the course of a discussion
with the critic Azorín.

[16] _De sobremesa_, IV, 237; an answer to criticism of the morality of
_La losa de los sueños_; cf. also _De sobremesa_, V, 161-163.

[17] Words spoken on the occasion of the farewell of Rosario Pino, and
included in the last volume of _De sobremesa_, V, 265.


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL NOTE

Comments on various phases of Benavente's career are found in a number
of sources; some are cited in the footnotes; others that have come to
the editor's notice are as follows:

Julio Brouta, "Spain's Greatest Dramatist," translated and published in
the _Drama_, November, 1915.

John Garret Underhill, "Introduction" to _Plays by Jacinto Benavente_,
New York, 1917.

Adolfo Bonilla y San Martín, "Jacinto Benavente," in the _Ateneo_,
January, 1906, pp. 27-40.

Manuel Bueno, "Jacinto Benavente," in _Teatro español contemporáneo_,
Madrid, 1909, pp. 129-177.

José León Pagano, "Jacinto Benavente," in _Al través de la España
literaria_, 3rd ed., Madrid, 1904, vol. 2, pp. 49-55.

Fitzmaurice-Kelly, _Littérature espagnole_, 2nd ed., Paris, 1913, pp.
452-453.

With special reference to _Los intereses creados_: Severino Aznar, in
_La Cultura española_, February, 1908, pp. 70-77; E. Gómez de Baquero,
in _La España moderna_, January, 1908, pp. 169-177; notices of other
plays are scattered through Spanish dramatic reviews.

[Illustration: J. Benavente]




JACINTO BENAVENTE


Jacinto Benavente nació en Madrid en 1866. Es un hombre pequeño, pulcro,
refinado; sus ademanes tienen una elegancia casi femenina; su perfil
aguileño y su barba en punta dan a su fisonomía una expresión netamente
española; pero su carácter reside sobre todo en su frente, ancha y
espaciosa como la de Cervantes,[b.1] y en sus ojos vivos y burlones en
los que hay, sin embargo, una ligera sombra de melancolía. Hombre de
mundo, gusta del trato social y de los viajes, a lo que debe su amplio
conocimiento, no sólo de la sociedad española, sino de la sociedad
cosmopolita. Es un conversador de mucho ingenio, a veces malicioso y
mordaz; pero su espíritu es bueno y tolerante como lo muestran sus bien
acreditados sentimientos humanitarios especialmente respecto de los
niños.

Su obra es extensa; ha escrito para el teatro unas ochenta obras durante
veinticinco años. Con ellas ha conquistado el primer puesto entre los
autores dramáticos de su tiempo.

Cuando Benavente empezó a escribir, hacia 1894, encontró grandes
dificultades para atraer la atención y la estimación del público. Los
principios estéticos del teatro de Benavente eran distintos y aun
contradictorios de los que dominaban entonces en España. Estaba entonces
en su apogeo el drama elevado y romántico, de trágicos conflictos y
pasiones violentas, cuyo principal representante fue Don José Echegaray.
Benavente, en cambio, aparecía como escritor de comedias realistas, en
las que la fuerza era sustituida por la gracia y la exaltación dramática
por la naturalidad y la verdad. No es extraño que el público necesitase
algún tiempo para cambiar su gusto y acostumbrarse a este nuevo tipo de
teatro más natural y más moderno. Más tarde el éxito fue completo y
Benavente goza hoy de la misma popularidad de que hace veinticinco años,
cuando él empezó a escribir, gozaba Echegaray.

Benavente ha pintado en sus comedias la sociedad española de hoy, sobre
todo la sociedad madrileña de las clases media y alta. La ha pintado
casi siempre con intención satírica ridiculizándola; seguramente hay en
esa sociedad madrileña mucho más de bueno y de malo que lo que Benavente
ha visto en ella, pero lo que él ha visto es verdad y es una verdad
divertida e interesante. Las primeras comedias son más puramente
satíricas y se reducen a la descripción de tipos y costumbres; la
naturalidad y la verdad de los personajes y la agudeza e ingenio de las
conversaciones constituyen el encanto de esas comedias.

Más adelante la visión del autor se ensancha y se eleva y sus comedias
adquieren un sentido más moral y humano. Hay en ellas no sólo una amena
burla de la sociedad que nos rodea, sino un ideal de una humanidad
mejor. Al mismo tiempo la ironía es más amable y tolerante, y aunque
siempre nos vemos invitados a reírnos de lo que es ridículo y a
despreciar lo que es malo y ruin, hay en estas obras un cierto espíritu
de simpatía humana que nos inclina a la tolerancia y a la compasión.

La obra de Benavente en que todas estas cualidades se han logrado de un
modo más acabado y más perfecto--al menos según la opinión de los
más--es la que constituye la base de este volumen: _Los intereses
creados_. Esta obra no es como las más de Benavente una pintura directa
de la sociedad contemporánea. Las ideas y los sentimientos, la visión
del mundo y de la vida, son los mismos que se han desarrollado a través
de toda la obra del autor; pero aparecen aquí, fuera de lugar y de
tiempo, con una sencillez e intensidad verdaderamente clásicas.
Siguiendo el artificio de la antigua farsa, los personajes de esta obra,
que al parecer son muñecos exagerados e ingenuos, nos muestran los hilos
por los que los hombres son movidos en la vida misma, las pasiones malas
y buenas que inspiran las acciones humanas. Un personaje astuto y sagaz,
conocedor experto del corazón humano, el pícaro Crispín, es el centro de
la obra; él es quien mueve todos esos hilos, quien pone en juego todas
esas pasiones, no en servicio propio sino en servicio de su compañero de
aventuras, que en la ficción de la obra ha tomado el papel de señor. Y
es realmente señor Leandro, porque es capaz de pensamientos elevados, de
idealismos superiores y de la generosidad del amor.

La antítesis de estos dos personajes, que en realidad son uno mismo
desdoblado en dos, de tal modo que el uno sin el otro no tendrían
existencia, es la reproducción audaz y feliz de un tema eterno, de aquél
mismo que encarnó de modo incomparable en las inmortales figuras de Don
Quijote y Sancho. Cada alma humana se encuentra representada en esos dos
personajes antitéticos que sin embargo se necesitan mutuamente; lo que
en nosotros hay de generoso, de grande, de elevado, necesita amenudo
para realizarse de otras aptitudes más bajas que hay también en nuestro
espíritu. El idealista sin sentido práctico suele ser un hombre ineficaz
e inepto destinado a ser vencido en las luchas ordinarias de la vida.

Parece pues que esta obra es una obra pesimista en la que se reconoce y
afirma la necesidad del mal. Es, sin duda, una obra satírica en la que
aparecen admirablemente pintadas algunas de las pequeñas pasiones,
ambiciones y vanidades que muy amenudo encontramos en la vida; pero el
amor y la generosidad triunfantes quedan afirmados en su pureza como
realidades más poderosas que todas las impurezas y ficciones que a su
alrededor se mueven en la comedia como en la vida.

La obra está escrita en un castellano noble y bello, sobrio y expresivo.
Aunque ciertos giros intentan darle un cierto sabor arcaico, el lenguaje
está lleno de sencillez y naturalidad. Tanto por el estilo como por la
concepción, los españoles consideran esta obra como una de las mejores
comedias del teatro moderno y hasta se atreven a compararla con las
grandes producciones del teatro clásico que floreció en España en el
siglo XVII.

Las otras dos obritas que acompañan en esta edición a _Los intereses
creados_ representan en pequeño el modo como Benavente acostumbra
escribir sus comedias contemporáneas. La lectura de ellas dará
suficiente idea de la finura y la gracia propias de este escritor y al
mismo tiempo dará a conocer unas cuantas escenas vivas y animadas en las
que tipos más o menos corrientes de la sociedad española expresan, con
la mayor naturalidad y verdad posibles, su manera de ser.


FOOTNOTES:

[b.1] Hay una semejanza bastante grande entre el retrato que Cervantes
ha dejado escrito de sí mismo y la fisonomía de Benavente; salvo el
color del pelo, que en Cervantes era rubio en la barba y castaño en la
cabeza y que en Benavente es más bien negro, hay una notoria
coincidencia en los demás rasgos. Cervantes era «de rostro aguileño, de
cabello castaño, frente lisa y desembarazada, de alegres ojos, y de
nariz corva aunque bien proporcionada..., los bigotes grandes, la boca
pequeña, los dientes ni menudos ni crecidos,... el cuerpo entre dos
extremos, ni grande ni pequeño,... algo cargado de espaldas y no muy
ligero de pies.» (Cervantes, Prólogo a las _Novelas ejemplares_)




SIN QUERER

BOCETO DE COMEDIA EN UN ACTO Y EN PROSA

Estrenado en el Teatro de la Comedia el día 3 de marzo de 1901

REPARTO

   PERSONAJES  ACTORES

   LUISA         SRA. PINO
   UNA DONCELLA  SRTA. SAMPEDRO
   PEPE          SR. BENAVENTE
   DON MANUEL     »  RUBIO

_En Madrid.--Gabinete elegante_




ACTO ÚNICO


Escena Primera

LUISA, la DONCELLA y después PEPE


DONCELLA. ¡Señorita Luisa, señorita Luisa!

LUISA. ¿Ha subido?

DONCELLA. Sí.

LUISA. ¿Por la escalera de servicio? ¿No le ha visto nadie?

DONCELLA. Por la escalera de servicio. ¡Cómo se conoce que la señorita
no está acostumbrada a estas cosas!... ¡Para llamar más la atención!...

LUISA. Es verdad; los porteros le conocen; y sobre todo, con que[3.1]
papá no le vea... Corre, que pase,[3.2] y ten mucho cuidado; en cuanto
salga mi tío de hablar con papá, nos avisas[3.3]...

DONCELLA. Descuide usted.

LUISA. Y no vayas a decir a nadie...

DONCELLA. ¡Señorita! Porque me haya usted oído[3.4] contar más de cuatro
cosas que ha visto una[3.5]... Tratándose de usted[3.6] ya sé que esto
no será ninguna trapisonda, aunque lo parezca.

LUISA. Por supuesto... Ya lo sabrás... Anda, no hagas ruido al
pasar[3.7] por el gabinete. (_Sale la doncella. A poco entra Pepe._)

PEPE. ¡Luisita!

LUISA. ¡Chist! No digas nada, no levantes la voz, no te muevas...
Tenemos que hablar; siéntate. No dejes el sombrero, no fumes... ¡Uf, qué
humo! No dejes ahí el cigarro. Siéntate, hombre,[4.1] siéntate. Ya
supondrás[4.2] por qué te he llamado de esta manera...

PEPE. Sí; supongo...

LUISA. No supones, lo sabes... Sabes que mi padre y el tuyo conferencian
en este momento.

PEPE. ¿En este momento?

LUISA. Sí. Se han encerrado en el despacho. Y era urgente, preciso, que
nosotros nos viéramos antes a solas, con toda libertad, para ponernos de
acuerdo... Nuestros padres deciden allí; pretenden decidir de nuestro
porvenir, disponer de nuestro corazón[4.3]... Ya estás enterado; quieren
casarnos.

PEPE. Sí; papá siempre me estaba diciendo: «Las bodas deben hacerse en
familia; hay más probabilidades de acertar... En nuestra familia hay
excelentes muchachas; debes fijarte en una de tus primas.» Pero la
verdad, como sois veintitantas en la familia... era imposible fijarse...

LUISA. Papá estaba siempre con la misma canción; pero como el único
primo casadero de la familia eres tú, cuando papá me decía: «Debes
casarte con uno de tus primos», ya sabía yo que el primo eras tú.
Comprende que hay mucha diferencia de[4.4] poder escoger entre
veintitantas a[4.4] no tener dónde escoger... Pero aparte de eso, la
idea de nuestros padres es ridícula. ¿Por qué nos hemos de[4.5] casar
nosotros? ¿Me quieres tú a mí? ¿Te quiero yo a ti? Es decir, nos
queremos... así, como buenos parientes... y eso es lo malo; mejor sería
que no nos quisiéramos nada; yo creo que me sería más fácil quererte
mucho de pronto no habiéndote querido nunca nada... Pero pensar ahora:
«¡Ea!, voy a quererle más, debo quererle más.» ¿Por qué voy a quererte
hoy más de lo que te quería ayer? Y, francamente, queriéndote hoy como
te quería ayer, es un disparate que piensen que nos casemos mañana.

PEPE. Sí, es expuesto.

LUISA. Y vamos a ver, ¿qué te ha dicho tu padre? Supongo que antes de
decidirse a hablar con el mío seriamente te habrá dicho[5.1] algo.

PEPE. Me ha dicho lo que me dice siempre que se enfada conmigo, cuando
le pido dinero, cuando paga mis cuentas: «Ya es hora de que[5.2] acaben
las locuras.» Papá llama locuras a las cuentas de 500 pesetas para
arriba... Ya ves, ésas son locuras del sastre, del camisero... «Es
preciso que pienses en casarte...»

LUISA. Eso es; cuando el señorito da guerra en casa...

PEPE. Y tu padre, ¿cuándo piensa casarte a ti?

LUISA. ¡Ay! Siempre que nos toca el turno del Real[5.3] y le obligo a
dejar su partida de tresillo. Lo que es[5.4] las noches de tercer
turno,[5.5] no le importaría[5.6] verme casada con cualquiera. Y en papá
se comprende ese afán... Viudo, con sus ocupaciones... Yo no puedo
soportar a las ayas, ni a las señoras de compañía; así es que vivo
sacrificada, porque papá sólo se presta a acompañarme al teatro Real;
eso sí, las noches que cantan La Walkyria ¡me da una lástima!

PEPE. Sí, tú, la verdad, sola con tu padre desde muy niña,[5.7] ya
debías haberte casado...

LUISA. ¿Ya? No dirás tú como papá, que me estoy pasando...

PEPE. ¡Qué disparate!

LUISA. No; es que como me pusieron de largo muy pronto, porque di un
estirón a los catorce años, la gente cree que tengo más edad. Pero tú
sabes...

PEPE. ¡Ay, si lo sé![6.1] Soy un viejo comparado contigo.

LUISA. Viejo, no; pero no estás para[6.2] perder el tiempo. Nuestros
padres tienen razón; debemos casarnos; pero cada uno por su lado. ¿No te
parece? No es que yo sea romántica (en toda mi vida habré leído dos
novelas), ni que yo sueñe con ideales, ni con príncipes encantados; pero
estas bodas, arregladas en familia, me parecen bodas de interés, de
conveniencia... Un poco de poesía nunca está de más... Sobre todo,
que[6.3] nosotros[6.4] se puede decir que no nos conocemos. ¿Qué sabes
tú de mí? ¿Qué sé yo de ti? Ni me ha importado nunca saberlo. ¿Sabes
siquiera si yo he tenido algún novio?

PEPE. No, que yo sepa, y hemos ido juntos alguna vez a bailes y hemos
pasado juntos todo un verano.

LUISA. Pues entonces tenía yo novio, ya ves, y ni siquiera te enteraste;
eso prueba lo que te importaba.

PEPE. ¡Ah, sí, aquel majadero!... ¿Cómo había de importarme?[6.5]

LUISA. Pues si me hubieras querido como pariente siquiera, debía haberte
importado que yo tuviera relaciones con un majadero.

PEPE. Estaba seguro de que[6.6] tienes demasiado talento para conocerlo
y no casarte con él...

LUISA. Muchas gracias, pero sigues equivocado; estaba enamoradilla[6.7]
de él, y él de mí, no se diga;[6.8] ¡y si vieras cuando un hombre se
enamora de verdad, qué difícil es distinguir a un majadero de un hombre
de talento!...

PEPE. No es verdad; un tonto no puede querer como una persona de
talento, ni se le puede querer lo mismo.

LUISA. ¿Por qué no? Mira, a las mujeres lo que nos halaga es que por
nuestro cariño se transformen los hombres en otros. El cariño es siempre
revolucionario, y para el caso lo mismo da que diga la gente:
«Fulanito,[7.1] que era tan simple, cómo se va avispando[7.2] desde que
usted le quiere.» O que diga: «Menganito, un hombre de tanto talento,
¡qué tonterías[7.3] hace desde que se ha enamorado de usted!» Por eso yo
no me casaría con un santo... ¿Qué iba yo a cambiar[7.4] en un santo?
Pero un hombre, así... algo extraviado... que se dejara convertir poco a
poco. ¡Qué bonito! Querer a un hombre, casarse con él y, al poco tiempo,
que aquel hombre sea otro hombre...

PEPE. Un marido de gran espectáculo, con mutaciones.[7.5]

LUISA. Ahí tienes lo que me parece imposible contigo: porque tú no eres
bueno ni malo, no tienes grandes defectos ni grandes virtudes. ¿Estoy
equivocada?

PEPE. ¡Quién sabe, quién sabe!

LUISA. No; me parece[7.6] que contigo no hay sorpresas...

PEPE. ¡Quién sabe, quién sabe!

LUISA. ¿De veras? ¿No eres lo que pareces?

PEPE. ¡Quién sabe, quién sabe!

LUISA. ¡Ay! No seas pesado; dime ese secreto...

PEPE. Si yo no tengo secretos;[7.7] digo, ¡quién sabe!, porque yo no sé
nada.

LUISA. Pero tú, ¿no has querido nunca?

PEPE. Alguna vez.

LUISA. ¿Novia formal?[7.8]

PEPE. No, muy loca.

LUISA. Digo,[7.9] pensando en casarte.

PEPE. Pensándolo mucho.

LUISA. ¿Y por qué la dejaste?

PEPE. Porque me enteré de que quería a otro.

LUISA. Entonces di que la que te dejó fue ella.

PEPE. No, ella no quería dejarme; estaba también por las mutaciones,
pero por otro sistema.

LUISA. ¿Y sentiste mucho aquel desengaño?

PEPE. ¡Ya lo creo! Fue cuando pasé aquella temporada en París para
distraerme.

LUISA. Sí, es verdad. Vaya, vaya, pareció[8.1] la novelita.

PEPE. Cuando tío Ramón fue a buscarme, comisionado por papá, porque le
habían dicho que yo tenía allí amores.

LUISA. ¡Qué gracioso! Con una francesa... Y tío Ramón, quieras que
no,[8.2] te trajo de una orejita...[8.3]

PEPE. A mí, no; adoptó el sistema más práctico, se la trajo a ella... En
el teatro Japonés la tienes[8.4] cantando.

LUISA. ¡Pobrecito! Todas te dejan... Debes tener el corazón
destrozado...

PEPE. No lo creas, fortalecido. Mis equivocaciones en la vida han sido
engaños, no desengaños, y no me han entristecido ni me han vuelto
desconfiado siquiera. Mi corazón está abierto de par en par.

LUISA. Esperando el cariño soñado, el ideal... ¿No es eso?

PEPE. Yo nunca he creído que el cariño..., el amor, en el lenguaje
poético, sea la felicidad por sí solo; nos lleva dulcemente de la mano
hasta la entrada; pero después el camino es penoso, y el amor, débil
niño, tiene que transformarse en algo más serio, más fuerte, para seguir
adelante, en deber, en sacrificio...

LUISA. Está muy bien eso que dices... ¡Primera sorpresa!

PEPE. ¡Bah! Tantas sorpresas podía[9.1] darte, y tú a mí, y los dos a
nosotros mismos... ¿Qué sabemos de la vida? ¿Cómo nos han educado? Con
el sistema de los padres en España: de considerar a los hijos siempre
como chiquillos; yo, en mi casa, soy siempre Pepito; tú, Luisita,
siempre para tu padre: dos chiquillos de quien[9.2] sólo se espera
alguna travesura, de quien nada se toma en serio; nuestros caprichos,
más o menos discutidos, satisfechos siempre; niños mimados por nuestros
padres, mal dispuestos a ser maltratados por los demás en la vida.
Cuando empecemos a vivir por nosotros mismos, pecaremos de osados o de
tímidos; no sabremos ir con la tranquila seguridad que da la confianza
en sí mismo, porque nuestros padres nos han dicho: «No seas así», o
«Debes ser así»; pero «Así eres», nunca. Yo no sé cómo soy, y a ti te
pasará lo mismo.

LUISA. Tienes mucha razón. No nos enseñan a conocernos. Y ahora, porque
a nuestros padres se les antoja que todo se quede en casa,[9.3] porque
nos juzgan además incapaces de elegir por nosotros mismos, nos dicen,
sin más ni más, «a casaros», y, de buenas a primeras, novios un par de
meses, y asunto concluido, y después desgraciados para toda la vida...
Si no estuviéramos de acuerdo para oponernos... Yo te confieso que no
seré la primera en decir que no; tú debes ser quien...

PEPE. Me opondré.

LUISA. Dices que soy muy buena, muy bonita, todo lo que quieras; pero
que no soy la mujer soñada... Tú tendrás tu ideal, como todo el mundo. A
propósito, ¿cómo es tu ideal?

PEPE. ¿Mi ideal? ¿Para mujer propia? Vas a reírte.

LUISA. ¿Rubia? ¿Morena? ¿Alta? ¿Bajita?

PEPE. No lo sé. Va vestida de gris; es lo único que puedo decirte.

LUISA. ¡Qué chifladura!

PEPE. Como en un cromo inglés que vi hace muchos años: una de esas
escenas plácidas de pintura inglesa; una muchacha vestida de gris, que
preparaba el _pudding_ de Navidad, y a su lado, sentado, un joven, el
esposo o el prometido, y alrededor unos gatos, y en el fondo unos viejos
leyendo la Biblia; y al otro lado, por una puerta abierta a un jardín,
unos niños muy rubios, jugando. Había no sé qué en aquel cromo, la
escena, el color, un tono general que lo envolvía todo,[10.1] el color
de la dicha a que puede aspirarse en este mundo.

LUISA. ¿Color de rosa?

PEPE. No, agrisado; un tono muy dulce; la dicha que se sueña, sí[10.2]
es de color de rosa; la que puede lograrse, la de la vida, es siempre
gris, el color de la melancolía resignada, de la tristeza bondadosa que
sonríe y perdona y ama.

LUISA. Yo tengo un vestido gris, no sé si será de ese tono exacto; me lo
pondré un día para parecerme a tu cromo inglés, digo, a tu ideal; será
en lo único que[10.3] me parezca.

PEPE. Y yo, ¿qué he de hacer para parecerme a tu ideal?...

LUISA. ¿A mi marido ideal? ¡Ay! Yo sé perfectamente cómo no ha de ser;
pero cómo ha de ser no sabría decirlo.

PEPE. ¿Y cómo no ha de ser?

LUISA. De muchos modos. No creas, los defectos grandes no me asustan
tanto como los pequeños, esos defectillos que hasta parecen gracias y
son los más peligrosos para la intimidad de toda la vida. Por ejemplo:
yo tengo una amiga que se ha casado con un muchacho ejemplar, un modelo,
todo el mundo lo dice; pues el otro día estuvieron aquí de visita, y por
un solo detalle me atrevo a pronosticar que no serían[11.1] felices.
Verás, parece una tontería; el marido le dijo a su mujer: «Merceditas,
llevas un descosido.» Y se lo dijo de un modo que indicaba que en aquel
matrimonio el marido sería siempre el primero que viera los descosidos.

PEPE. ¡Qué gracioso!

LUISA. Es que aquello sólo indicaba un cambio de papeles muy antipático.
¿Pues qué me dices cuando en un matrimonio es el marido el que tiene que
advertir que se gasta mucho? ¡Qué cosa más fea cuando la mujer
está[11.2] a todas horas: «Yo compraría esto, yo tendría esto otro»; y
el marido: «Que[11.3] la vida es muy cara, que no podemos gastar
tanto!...» En cambio, ¿hay nada más bonito para una mujer que, sin pedir
nunca nada, verse obsequiada por su marido de cuando en cuando con
cualquier regalito, y, disimulando mal la alegría, reprenderle
cariñosa:[11.4] «¿Por qué has comprado esto? No estamos para gastos; te
habrán llevado un dineral, y es de muy buen gusto», aunque sea un
mamarracho y sepamos que le ha costado tres pesetas?

PEPE. Sabes mucho...

LUISA. Es mi sistema con papá, y así consigo que siempre me esté
regalando, algunas veces cosas horribles; pero ¡líbreme Dios de
decírselo! Y lo mismo haría con mi marido. Hay mujeres tan mal educadas
que cambian en las tiendas los regalos que las traen sus pobrecitos
maridos, tan ufanos, creyéndolos del mejor gusto... Tú dirás que en qué
cosas me fijo[11.5] y a qué detalles doy importancia...

PEPE. No, no; estamos conformes... Yo también doy mucha importancia a
los detalles... y pienso como tú...

LUISA. Así comprenderás que no estaba dispuesta a casarme contigo, ni
con nadie, sólo por complacer[12.1] a papá.

PEPE. Ni yo contigo; puedes creerlo.

LUISA. Creían, porque a ellos les conviniera[12.2]... Afortunadamente,
verán que los dos estamos de acuerdo, y no habrá desaire por parte de
ninguno.

PEPE. Por mi parte, nunca lo hubiera habido;[12.3] me hubiera presentado
aquí como novio por no contrariar[12.4] a papá, y hubiera hecho todo lo
posible por parecerte mal.

LUISA. Pues hubiera sido un noviazgo famoso, porque yo pensaba también
parecerte insoportable.

PEPE. Afortunadamente, has tenido una gran idea; después de esta
entrevista...

LUISA. ¿No era lo mejor? Hablar claro, hablando se entiende la gente; ya
lo has visto: hablando aquí, a solas, sin fingimientos, dejándonos
llevar de la conversación sin querer...

PEPE. Y sin querernos... he descubierto que tengo una prima encantadora.

LUISA. Y yo que tengo un primo muy simpático y muy razonable, que piensa
como yo en muchas cosas de la vida.

PEPE. Es que piensas muy bien en todo.

LUISA. De manera que nuestros padres, si no consiguen lo que se
proponen, han conseguido algo mejor para nosotros: que desde hoy nos
estimemos de verdad; cuando antes, a mí, te lo confieso, me eras
indiferente, pero[12.5] muy indiferente.

PEPE. Como tú a mí.

LUISA. ¡Y querían casarnos!

PEPE. Ya ves, ¿cómo era posible?

LUISA. Me parece que nunca se habrá descompuesto una boda más
amistosamente.

PEPE. De seguro que, casándonos, no estaríamos tan contentos el uno del
otro.

LUISA. Ya quisiera yo, si algún día me caso, que mi marido se parezca a
ti en algo.

PEPE. Y yo que mi mujer se parezca a ti en todo.

LUISA. ¿De veras?... ¿De qué te ríes?

PEPE. ¿Pero te has fijado en lo que estamos diciendo?

LUISA. ¿Eh?... Pues es verdad. Pero ¡qué tontos! ¡Qué tontos! Ahora
resulta que casi nos hemos enamorado el uno del otro.

PEPE. Y que en vista de eso decidimos no casarnos... ¿Qué te parece? Es
gracioso...

LUISA. Sí; es gracioso...


ESCENA II

DICHOS y la DONCELLA


DONCELLA. ¡Señorita! Su tío de usted sale en este momento del despacho.

PEPE. Ha terminado la conferencia.

LUISA. Y nuestra conspiración. En cuanto baje tu padre la escalera,
sales[13.1] por aquí. Papá vendrá en seguida a darme cuenta del
resultado de la entrevista. ¡Si supiera!...

DONCELLA. Han cerrado la puerta de la calle.

LUISA. Pues anda..., vete...

PEPE. Yo quisiera saber, ya que estoy aquí... ¿No podría esperar?...

LUISA. Si papá te ve...

DONCELLA. Sí, en mi cuarto; venga usted.

LUISA. No, no; si lo ve alguien...

DONCELLA. Descuide usted, señorita. Diré que ha venido por mí... y lo
creerán.

LUISA. Pronto; papá viene.

DONCELLA. Venga usted... (_Salen Pepe y la doncella._)


ESCENA III

LUISA, D. MANUEL y después PEPE


LUISA. ¿Qué tienes, papá? ¿No me contestas? Yo creí que tendrías que
hablarme...

MANUEL. No.

LUISA. ¿No estaba tío Carlos contigo?

MANUEL. Sí.

LUISA. ¿A qué ha venido[14.1] tan temprano?

MANUEL. A nada.

LUISA. ¿Estás seguro? Vaya, papá, lo que te sucede es que tienes que
decirme muchas cosas y no sabes cómo empezar.

MANUEL. No tengo que decirte nada. Y, sobre todo, no vuelvas a mentar a
tu tío. ¡Ha muerto para mí!

LUISA. Entonces... mi primo Pepe...

MANUEL. Ha muerto también.

LUISA. Te advierto que hoy es turno tercero.

MANUEL. ¿Y qué?

LUISA. Nada; que con tanto luto en la familia no me parece bien que
vayamos al teatro.

MANUEL. ¡Turno tercero! ¡Turno tercero! ¡No me importa! Desde hoy te
acompañaré todas las noches al teatro, te divertirás, nos divertiremos.
No estés triste, hija mía. ¿Se[15.1] creerá tu tío que no hay más
hombre que tu primo?

LUISA. Pero es que...

MANUEL. ¡Y por cuestión de intereses! ¡Qué falta de decoro! Cuando yo,
haciendo un sacrificio y por tratarse de ellos, te dotaba con mis dos
mejores fincas y algo de papel y unos créditos que pueden cobrarse, ¿con
qué dirás que se descuelga tu tío? Con que él no se desprende de nada,
que os pasará un tanto, pero nada más. Conozco yo los tantos de tu tío:
os lo pasaría un mes, ¡viejo avariento!, y después os dejaría morir de
hambre. Porque yo os doy lo suficiente para la casa, y el coche, y los
viajes de veraneo; pero si él no os da nada no tendréis qué comer. ¿Y
cómo vais a vivir sin comer?

LUISA. Es verdad; sin comer y con coche... ¿De modo que habéis regañado?

MANUEL. ¡No tienes idea! Le he dicho lo que pensaba de él hace mucho
tiempo y del botarate de su hijo[15.2]...

LUISA. Pero, ¿qué sabe Pepe?...

MANUEL. Para cuando lo sepa.

LUISA. ¡Ay, papá, estás muy alterado!

MANUEL. Es que no puedo con las gentes que todo lo[15.3] sacrifican al
interés, como si todo fuera cuestión de dinero en la vida y eso valiera
la pena de descomponer una familia. ¡Un tanto! ¡Un tanto! Y el viejo
marrullero ni siquiera quería firmar, para no comprometerse a nada.
¿Pensaba que yo iba a casarte sin garantías?

LUISA. Es la moda, papá.

MANUEL. No lo eches a broma.

LUISA. Al contrario. Es decir, que vosotros disponéis y os indisponéis
cuando os conviene, sin contar para nada con[15.4] nosotros, como si
Pepe y yo fuéramos dos chiquillos sin voluntad y sin corazón; ni antes
os importaba que no nos quisiéramos, ni ahora que pudiéramos querernos.
¿No es eso?

MANUEL. Querrás decirme que estás enamorada de tu primo...

LUISA. Supongamos que lo estuviera.

MANUEL. Dejémonos de suposiciones...

PEPE. Sí, dejémonos. Yo estoy enamorado de Luisa.

MANUEL. ¡Eh! ¿Qué haces tú aquí? ¿Qué significa esto?

PEPE. Significa que, mientras ustedes hablaban de intereses, nosotros
hemos dejado hablar a nuestro corazón; y como hablando, hablando se
entiende la gente...

LUISA. Hemos decidido lo contrario de ustedes, casarnos.

MANUEL. Así... en media hora. ¡Estáis locos!

LUISA. ¿Qué quiere usted? Media hora de conversación, convenciéndonos de
que no debíamos casarnos, nos ha dado a conocer mejor que dos años de
relaciones para casarnos.

PEPE. No teníamos por qué fingir...

LUISA. Ni por qué engañarnos.

PEPE. Hemos hablado con franqueza, decididos a no querernos.

LUISA. Y sin querer, sin querer...

MANUEL. Eso creéis vosotros. ¡No habréis coqueteado poco! En fin, por mi
parte, si os engañáis, y creyendo conoceros a fondo, os conocéis menos
que nunca...

PEPE. Ya no es preciso que nos conozcamos más.

LUISA. Ahora nos basta con querernos mucho. (_Telón._)




DE PEQUEÑAS CAUSAS...

BOCETO DE COMEDIA EN UN ACTO


Estrenado en el Teatro de la Princesa la noche del 14 de marzo de 1908

REPARTO


      PERSONAJES  ACTORES

   EMILIA    SRA. COBEÑA (CARMEN)
   MANUEL    SR. MORANO
   GONZÁLEZ   »  MANSO
   HERNÁNDEZ  »  COMES
   UN CRIADO  N. N.




DE PEQUEÑAS CAUSAS...

ACTO ÚNICO

Gabinete


ESCENA I

GONZÁLEZ, MANUEL y un CRIADO


CRIADO. No insista usted: le digo que el señor no está,[19.1] que no
volverá en todo el día.

GONZÁLEZ. Le digo a usted que para mí sí;[19.2] le digo a usted que
estoy en el secreto.

CRIADO. Usted quiere comprometerme.

GONZÁLEZ. Le digo a usted que no... Pásele usted esta tarjeta.

CRIADO. Pero, caballero...

GONZÁLEZ. O a su señora, es lo mismo...; yo he de verle, sea como sea.

CRIADO. Pero...

GONZÁLEZ. Nada,[19.3] que he de verle.

CRIADO. Caballero..., usted puede hacer lo que guste;[19.4] pero le
aseguro a usted...

GONZÁLEZ. No asegure usted nada. Es que habrá usted recibido esa
orden..., sí...; lo sé todo..., lo que ocurre en casos semejantes...;
por eso sé lo que debo hacer, lo de siempre, no hacerle a usted caso; ya
lo ve usted...

CRIADO. Como usted quiera. (_Entra Manuel._)

GONZÁLEZ. ¿Lo ve usted?

CRIADO. Yo he cumplido con la orden del señor; pero el señor[20.1]...

MANUEL. Bien está... (_Sale el Criado._)

GONZÁLEZ. Comprenda usted que yo necesitaba verle.

MANUEL. Comprenda usted que yo no quiero ver a nadie...; a los amigos
como usted mucho menos; sé lo que va usted a decirme... Es inútil, todo
inútil; mi resolución es irrevocable... El presidente le ha dicho a
usted lo que había..., ha leído usted los periódicos...; no tengo que
decirle más.

GONZÁLEZ. Pero...

MANUEL. Es inútil, todo inútil... Nadie dirá que yo he provocado el
conflicto. Desde mi entrada en el Ministerio, usted sabe a costa de
cuántos sacrificios, mi permanencia en él ha sido para mí una serie de
abdicaciones; he podido aceptarlas mientras sólo se trataba de mis
convicciones particulares, hasta de mis afectos; pero ahora, no; ahora
se trata de mis compromisos con la opinión, con el país...; pretender
esta nueva abdicación, es tanto como renegar de toda mi historia
política; de mi significación en el partido; de mi personalidad; de mi
conciencia..., y a eso no puedo llegar, porque sería tanto como negarme
a mí mismo.

GONZÁLEZ. Pero, querido amigo, piense usted la situación, el
conflicto...

MANUEL. No es culpa mía... Se desoyeron mis advertencias; se desdeñaron
mis concesiones... Yo no soy un hombre de partido...; para mí, antes que
los hombres están las ideas.

GONZÁLEZ. Por eso mismo debe usted transigir con las personas, sin
perjuicio de seguir con sus ideas.

MANUEL. Es inútil. Mi resolución es irrevocable.


ESCENA II

DICHOS y HERNÁNDEZ


HERNÁNDEZ. ¡Ah!, ya sabía yo que estaba usted en casa... El criado se
empeñaba en negarme la entrada, querido González...

GONZÁLEZ. Amigo Hernández... ¿Viene usted como yo... a convencer a
nuestro ilustre amigo?...

HERNÁNDEZ. A nuestro querido amigo... Pero usted le habrá convencido
ya... Eso no puede ser...; ¡provocar una crisis en las actuales
circunstancias..., una crisis... por una tontería!... Comprendo si
hubiera usted tenido algún disgusto personal...; pero usted sabe que
sólo cuenta usted con[21.1] verdaderos amigos en el Gobierno y en la
mayoría.

MANUEL. Pero amigos que no piensan como yo en asuntos tan importantes
como los que yo defiendo.

HERNÁNDEZ. Pero ése no es motivo; a usted personalmente no se le niega
nada.

MANUEL. Se me niega el cumplimiento de mis compromisos ante la opinión,
ante el país.

GONZÁLEZ. Pero, ¿a qué[21.2] llama usted opinión? ¿A los periódicos? ¡Si
se abstuviera usted de leerlos!...

MANUEL. Mi padre tuvo la debilidad de mandarme al colegio y yo la de
aprender a leer..., y la mala costumbre de leerlo todo. La actitud del
avestruz ocultando la cabeza debajo del ala, para no ver el peligro, no
es la actitud más propia de un hombre de gobierno...

GONZÁLEZ. Pero, querido amigo, yo le creí a usted de más carácter.

MANUEL. Hoy llaman ustedes carácter a no tener ninguno, a pasar
por[21.3] todo.

HERNÁNDEZ. No, querido amigo; a sobreponerse a todo, que no es lo
mismo..., a mostrarse superior a las circunstancias...

MANUEL. No se cansen ustedes, mi resolución es irrevocable.

GONZÁLEZ. Pero, querido amigo... Reflexione usted... Compromete usted
gravemente la situación, da usted armas a las oposiciones...

MANUEL. Al contrario, facilito una solución a mis compañeros.

HERNÁNDEZ. Usted sabe que la provisión de su cartera en estos momentos
mostraría más claramente las escisiones del partido.

MANUEL. Eso es lo que pretendo...; demarcar los campos, aclarar la
situación, despejar incógnitas.

GONZÁLEZ. Pero usted sabe el peligro de despejar incógnitas. Además, se
expone usted a quedarse solo.

MANUEL. Me basto.[22.1]

HERNÁNDEZ. Mire usted que[22.2] se llegará al límite de las
concesiones...

MANUEL. A ese límite he llegado yo hace mucho tiempo.

HERNÁNDEZ. Que puede encontrarse una fórmula todavía..., una fórmula
aceptable.

MANUEL. La que yo he propuesto.

GONZÁLEZ. Ésa no es posible.

MANUEL. No hay otra.

HERNÁNDEZ. Concédanos usted un plazo... Entre todos hallaremos una
fórmula.

MANUEL. No.

GONZÁLEZ. Un día...

MANUEL. No.

GONZÁLEZ. Una hora...; hablaremos con el jefe, con el jefe de las
oposiciones... Volveremos con su contestación... Pero ceda usted en
algo...

MANUEL. Nunca. He llegado al límite de las concesiones.

HERNÁNDEZ. ¿Nos promete usted no hacer saber[23.1] a nadie su resolución
hasta después de hablar nuevamente con nosotros?

MANUEL. Nada conseguirán ustedes. Y será inútil que vuelvan ustedes si
no se acepta por entero mi última proposición de arreglo.

GONZÁLEZ. ¿Por entero?... Un paso más, querido amigo...

MANUEL. Yo no sé andar más que avanzando. Un paso más sería una
concesión menos.

HERNÁNDEZ. Avance usted hacia la avenencia... Los demás avanzarán en el
mismo sentido, y aquí no ha pasado nada... Entretanto..., una hora de
espera..., una hora..., usted reflexione; entretanto..., nosotros
trabajaremos...

MANUEL. Creo que no conseguirán ustedes nada... De mí han conseguido
ustedes cuanto podía concederles: atención, gratitud por sus buenos
deseos.

GONZÁLEZ. Usted sabe que somos de los leales...

HERNÁNDEZ. De los que le seguiremos a usted siempre que usted nos
acompañe. Hasta ahora.

GONZÁLEZ. Querido amigo... (_Salen._)

MANUEL. No estoy para nadie..., bajo ningún pretexto vuelvan a recibir a
nadie... He salido en el automóvil... Estoy en el campo... No se sabe
dónde estoy... A nadie, sea quien sea...


ESCENA III

MANUEL y EMILIA


EMILIA. ¿Me concede audiencia el señor ministro?[24.1]

MANUEL. Entra, entra...

EMILIA. ¿No has leído todavía los periódicos?

MANUEL. ¿Por qué?

EMILIA. Porque todos los días te ponen de mal humor... ¡Si hicieras lo
que yo!... Yo no los leo nunca...

MANUEL. Debías presidir el Ministerio.

EMILIA. Si acaso,[24.2] las noticias de sociedad, los teatros... y los
anuncios.

MANUEL. Sí; ahora pueden leerse los anuncios...

EMILIA. Para saber lo que pasa me basta con mirarte a la cara... Hoy es
un buen día...

MANUEL. Sí, no ocurre nada...

EMILIA. ¡Cuánto me alegro!... Por supuesto, nunca ocurre nada... ¿Cuándo
ha estado todo como ahora?... Eso es lo que molesta... Hasta los cambios
han bajado...

MANUEL. Ya sabes más que yo... Y dices que no lees los periódicos...

EMILIA. No; lo sé por mi modisto... Me ha enviado un encargo de París, y
al pagarle... Le he pagado yo... ¿Qué dices?... No dirás que pido
créditos extraordinarios[24.3]... Yo, yo..., sí, señor; de los
presupuestos ordinarios...

MANUEL. Así me gusta.

EMILIA. ¡Oh, soy una gran ministra de Hacienda!... No tendrás queja de
mí... ¡Sostener mis gastos de representación sin acudir al capítulo de
imprevistos!... Y tú no sabes lo que eso cuesta... Me llaman elegante y
distinguida en todos los periódicos..., los ministeriales y los de
oposición.

MANUEL. Los cronistas de salones son siempre ministeriales. El gobierno
de las mujeres es muy tiránico y no consiente la menor oposición.

EMILIA. O muy liberal y no las motiva... ¡Qué poco galante!

MANUEL. Y sepamos, ¿qué maravilla es ésa que ha llegado de París?

EMILIA. ¡Oh! Ya verás... Es un poema..., un sueño... ¡Un vestido ideal!
Una obra de arte... Los hombres no saben apreciar esas delicadezas... Si
acaso, el conjunto...; pero los detalles...

MANUEL. Es que uno de los detalles suele ser la factura.

EMILIA. ¿La factura? Un vestido así siempre es barato..., y a mí me
hacen precios excepcionales. Este traje no sería para otra menos de los
tres mil, y a mí me han puesto dos mil novecientos cuarenta y cinco...,
todo comprendido...: Aduanas, envío...

MANUEL. Sí, es una ganga.

EMILIA. Una verdadera creación...;[25.1] y el caso es que no tiene
nada..., es el _chic_,[25.2] nada... Lo ves en la mano y dices: esto no
vale nada..., cualquiera puede hacerlo; pero luego lo ves puesto... y...
ya verás..., ya verás...

MANUEL. ¿Y cuándo voy a verlo?...

EMILIA. ¡Qué pregunta! Pasado mañana, en Palacio, en la comida en honor
del príncipe turco.

MANUEL. Persa...

EMILIA. Es lo mismo... Esta vez no tendrás nada que decir del escote...

MANUEL. No, no diré nada...; entre otras cosas..., porque esa comida...

EMILIA. ¡Qué!... ¿Se ha suspendido? ¿No viene el príncipe?

MANUEL. Sí, el príncipe, sí... Además, si no viene ése, vendrá otro...
Pero es que para ese día ya no seré ministro.

EMILIA. ¡Eh!... ¿Hay crisis? ¿Cómo es posible?... ¡Si no me ha dicho
nada[26.1] la peinadora!...

MANUEL. La peinadora no lo sabrá todavía...

EMILIA. ¡Si peina a la de González y a la de Hernández!...

MANUEL. Es crisis parcial..., dimito yo sólo...

EMILIA. ¿Tú sólo? ¿Y qué has podido hacer para ser tú sólo el que
dimite?

MANUEL. No voy a explicártelo ahora... Me sobran razones...

EMILIA. ¡Ah, pero es por tu gusto!

MANUEL. ¡Claro está!... ¿Creías que me habían echado?

EMILIA. Es que de otro modo no lo comprendo...

MANUEL. No estoy conforme con la marcha del Gobierno...; mis ideas son
antes que todo...

EMILIA. Pero yo creí que tus ideas eran las del Gobierno...

MANUEL. Eso creía yo hasta ayer por la tarde.

EMILIA. ¡Ah, fue ayer por la tarde!... ¡Y no me dijiste nada!...

MANUEL. Quise tomarme[26.2] toda la noche para reflexionar.

EMILIA. ¡Ah, por eso estuviste tan desvelado!... ¿Y te aceptan la
dimisión?

MANUEL. Que la acepten o no la acepten[27.1]...

EMILIA. ¡Ah!, ¿pero no la has presentado todavía?

MANUEL. Sí, particularmente..., por carta... Oficial no es todavía...
Esperan convencerme; trabajan para ello...

EMILIA. ¿Y te convencerán?...

MANUEL. Eso sí que no... Mi resolución es irrevocable. He llegado al
límite de las concesiones...

EMILIA. ¿No te dieron aquella credencial que pediste?

MANUEL. Sí..., eso sí...; se desviven por complacerme...

EMILIA. ¿Entonces...?

MANUEL. Pero no es eso..., no se trata de credenciales... Se trata de
mis compromisos ante la opinión..., el país... ¿Qué voy a decirte?
Puedes comprender que tendré mis razones...

EMILIA. No lo sé...; pero salir tú sólo... La verdad, es muy
desairado... Van a decir que no tienes razón...

MANUEL. Ellos sí lo dirán...

EMILIA. Ya ves..., y ellos se quedan... Es una triste gracia... y es dar
gusto a tus enemigos...

MANUEL. Mis enemigos tendrán que reconocer mi sinceridad.

EMILIA. ¡De modo que te importa más quedar bien con tus enemigos que con
tus amigos!...

MANUEL. Mira, Emilia, no he querido ver nunca en ti a un amigo político,
mucho menos a un contrincante...

EMILIA. Creo que nunca..., pero sí[27.2] una mujer que te aconseja
siempre lo mejor...; eso debes haberlo visto en mí siempre. No dirás que
yo intervengo nunca en tus asuntos. Nunca te he molestado con
recomendaciones..., y tú sabes si me las piden... He preferido quedar
mal con muchos amigos por no molestarte lo más mínimo... Desde que eres
ministro, ¿qué te he pedido? Que recomendaras al novio de mi doncella
para Orden público y a una hermana de mi peinadora para que la
contrataran en un cinematógrafo de un diputado[28.1]... Lo que no podrás
decir es que yo he abusado nunca de mi posición. A otras hubiera yo
querido ver en mi caso... Ahí tienes a la de tu compañero Ruiz Gómez,
que no le da almuerzo ni comida tranquila a su marido..., y cuando él no
hace lo que ella quiere, se va de Ministerio en Ministerio, poniéndole
en evidencia...

MANUEL. ¡Si no fuera más que de Ministerio en Ministerio!

EMILIA. Ella le pide a todo el mundo[28.2]. Y su marido tan contento.

MANUEL. No lo creas...; en Consejo se incomoda mucho...

EMILIA. Pero no dimite... ¿Oyes? No hace más que sonar el timbre...
Amigos que vendrán a convencerte; gente que vendrá a saber...

MANUEL. He dicho que no recibo a nadie...

EMILIA. ¿Pero tan serio es el motivo?

MANUEL. Muy serio.

EMILIA. ¿Y no puede haber, por lo menos, un aplazamiento?

MANUEL. ¿Para qué? Lo que ha de ser[28.3]... Pero tú decías siempre que
estabas deseando verme libre de preocupaciones..., de disgustos...

EMILIA. Sí..., sí..., y lo digo...; pero precisamente...

MANUEL. Precisamente qué...

EMILIA. ¡Que para una vez que estaba yo contenta de ser ministra!...

MANUEL. Si tú no eres vanidosa... ¡No parece sino que tú necesitas que
yo sea ministro para lucir..., para... ¡Ah, vamos!...; ese vestido de
París..., el capricho de lucirlo pasado mañana...

EMILIA. ¿Qué quieres? ¡Estaba tan ilusionada!...

MANUEL. ¡Que no tendrás ocasión![29.1]... En cualquier baile...

EMILIA. No es de baile[29.2]... es de comida...; ése es su _chic_, que
no sirve más que para comida, y para comida en Palacio.

MANUEL. ¡Y en honor de un príncipe persa!... ¡Tanto quieres
puntualizar!... ¡No sé qué especialidad puede tener un vestido para no
servir más que en ocasión determinada!

EMILIA. ¡Qué quieres!...; éste es así..., y mi capricho es lucirlo en
esta ocasión... ¿Por qué tú tenías tanto afán en ser ministro en este
Gobierno más que en otros? Recuerda...

MANUEL. Sí, salgo por amor propio...

EMILIA. Por chafar a Hernández...; tú me lo dijiste... Pues figúrate que
yo también quiero chafar a alguien..., a alguien que yo sé que se ha
burlado de mí; mujer de alguno de tus compañeros de Ministerio...

MANUEL. ¿Quién hace caso?

EMILIA. Sí, sí, me lo han dicho...; me consta: ha dicho que soy cursi...
¡Como soy la única joven del Ministerio!...

MANUEL. Y la más guapa, también puedes decirlo...

EMILIA. Eso lo dices tú..., y me gusta oírlo... Pero eso lo puede ser
cualquiera...; elegante, ya es más difícil...

MANUEL. También lo eres..., como debes serlo...

EMILIA. Si..., ¡pero si vieras!... Yo comprendo que algunas veces no he
estado acertada en la _toilette_..., pecaba por exceso...; pero ahora
este vestido es de un supremo _chic_...; como que he sostenido
correspondencia diaria con el modisto durante veinte días..., y muestras
van y vienen, y figurines y descripciones..., y yo sin decidirme, y él
ideando creaciones... «Sueño con usted», me dice en una de sus cartas...

MANUEL. ¡Caracoles!

EMILIA. «Piense usted en mí siempre», le digo yo en todas las mías...

MANUEL. ¡Pues sabes que cualquiera que leyese la correspondencia...!

EMILIA. Mira, voy a ponerme el vestido..., para ti... Quiero que lo veas
antes que nadie, que lo admires...

MANUEL. No, no...; ya tendré ocasión...

EMILIA. Pasado mañana...

MANUEL. Sí, hay función en el Real y quieres ponértelo...

EMILIA. Para el Real... es demasiado; llamaría la atención...

MANUEL. ¡Pues si no es eso lo que te propones...!

EMILIA. ¿Llamar la atención? ¡De ningún modo! El verdadero _chic_ es
ése... No llamar la atención y que todo el mundo se fije...

MANUEL. No me explico[30.1] cómo puede ser eso; pero, en fin, la
_toilette_ tiene sus secretos...

EMILIA. Como la política... Y hoy va a tener uno...

MANUEL. ¿Uno? ¿Cuál?

EMILIA. El desistir de tu dimisión.

MANUEL. Sí..., por un vestido... ¡Tendría que ver![31.1]

EMILIA. Por el vestido no, por mí... ¿No valgo yo ese sacrificio..., que
no lo[31.2] es..., porque tú serás el primero en alegrarte como todos
tus amigos?

MANUEL. Mis amigos sí..., ¡y cómo se reirían!

EMILIA. ¡Sí que[31.3] ellos no habrán hecho cosas más graves por cosas
de menor importancia!

MANUEL. ¿De menos importancia que el capricho de lucir el vestido?

EMILIA. El de lucir ellos alguna banda o algún discurso preparado. Todo,
satisfacción de la vanidad...; pero a los hombres os parece[31.4] que
vuestras vanidades son más trascendentales... Después de todo, ¿por qué
te empeñas en dimitir? Por vanidad.

MANUEL. ¡Dignidad!

EMILIA. ¡Vanidad! Porque dijiste una cosa y no quieres decir otra...; la
vanidad de sostener tu carácter..., y por ella comprometes a tus amigos,
expones pones al Gobierno a una crisis desagradable..., de mal
efecto...; pasarás por[31.5] orgulloso, por testarudo..., por no saber
amoldarte a las circunstancias... Ese defecto lo has tenido siempre...;
te lo dicen los periódicos todos los días...

MANUEL. ¿No quedamos en que no los leías?

EMILIA. Alguna vez...; y cuando esa vez da la casualidad..., es que te
lo dirán todos los días... «La terquedad del señor ministro..., su
inflexibilidad... El señor ministro confunde la tozudez con el
carácter...» Tienen mucha razón, y eso que no te ven en casa...

MANUEL. ¡Emilia! Me desagrada oírte...

EMILIA. La verdad desagrada siempre... Pero no me dirás que tú solo vas
a tener más razón que todo el Ministerio... Y aunque la tuvieras...;
entre personas educadas se cede...; ellos cederán otras veces... Vas a
ponerte en ridículo... Te habrá aconsejado tu amigote Pepe..., porque tú
eres así...: mucho carácter, y luego te dejas llevar de cualquiera, del
que te aconseja con peor intención... Porque Pepe[32.1] lo que está
deseando es que dejes de ser ministro; te tiene mucha envidia.

MANUEL. ¿Pero qué tiene que ver Pepe, ni qué me aconseja?...

EMILIA. No digas[32.2]..., siempre, para todo... Hasta cuando pusimos el
comedor y tu despacho... tuvo que ser como él dijo..., una
cursilería..., el comedor modernista, que parece un café de provincia, y
tu despacho, en cambio, que parece una funeraria... Como lo de llevarte
a su sastre, que no sabe vestirte... La otra noche me fijé en el baile
de la Embajada: nadie lleva el chaleco de frac en forma de corazón, como
el que te han hecho..., ni las vueltas de raso..., y esos chalecos de
fantasía que llevas son ridículos, y ya verás cómo la toman[32.3]
contigo en las caricaturas...

MANUEL. ¡Emilia! ¡Emilia! Que mis nervios están en tensión y ya no
respondo.

EMILIA. No te faltaba más que yo pagase tus disgustos políticos. Como la
política me ha dado tantas satisfacciones...: sacrificios, molestias...
Por ti he perdido las relaciones con mis mejores amigas..., y en cambio
tengo que tratar a mucha gente que me desagrada..., a quien yo no
distingo..., que no debía de tratar..., y así en todo..., siempre
sacrificada... El verano pasado sin tomar las aguas por no dejarte solo
en Madrid, porque tú no podías salir con las dichosas Cortes..., y estas
Navidades sin poder ir a ver a mamá con los dichosos proyectos, y para
una satisfacción que podía una tener una vez..., para un capricho que
tiene una..., como si fuera un crimen..., ya es una... una intrigante,
ya exige una demasiado, ya compromete una su carrera política, su
dignidad..., ¡qué sé yo!... No te faltaba más que decir que yo te pongo
en ridículo, como la de Ruiz Gómez a su marido...; pero me lo dirás...,
me lo dirás...

MANUEL. ¡Emilia, Emilia!...

EMILIA. No, si ahora soy quien desea que presentes la dimisión... ahora
mismo, ahora mismo...; pero no vuelvas a hablarme de política ni de
carteras... Nos iremos a vivir a un pueblo, donde siquiera tenga[33.1]
tranquilidad..., lo único que yo he deseado siempre..., una casita en un
pueblo con sus gallinas y sus palomas..., eso, eso..., y nada de este
infierno, de estas intrigas... Todo antes que verte así..., todo antes
de que quieras pagar conmigo porque los demás te disgustan...

MANUEL. Esto es peor que veinte discursos de oposición... Me voy al
Congreso..., al Senado..., todo es preferible... El gabán... El
sombrero...

EMILIA. ¿Pero no llevas la dimisión?

MANUEL. No, no dimito... Sin el Ministerio no tendría pretexto para
estar tanto tiempo fuera de casa..., y cualquiera te aguantaba[33.2] en
un año... Irás a la comida, lucirás el vestido. No será la primera vez
que una falda haya decidido una crisis... ¿Estás contenta?

EMILIA. Sí, pero no te enfades... ¡Cuando veas el vestido, lo
comprenderás todo!...

MANUEL. Sí, pero al día siguiente sí que no debes leer más que la
crónica de sociedad, porque ¡lo que van a decir de mí los periódicos!

EMILIA. Los de oposición. Si hubieras dimitido lo dirían los
ministeriales... ¡Siempre han de decir!

MANUEL. ¡Y aun piden las mujeres que os concedan[34.1] el derecho a
votar, como si no gobernarais el mundo!...

EMILIA. Yo no, no pido semejante cosa... Si se presenta la proposición
puedes votar en contra.




LOS INTERESES CREADOS

COMEDIA DE POLICHINELAS EN DOS ACTOS, TRES CUADROS Y UN PRÓLOGO

Estrenada en el Teatro Lara el día 9 de diciembre de 1907

A DON RAFAEL GASSET

SU AFECTÍSIMO

JACINTO BENAVENTE


REPARTO



      PERSONAJES  ACTORES

   DOÑA SIRENA                SRA. VALVERDE
   SILVIA                     SRTA. SUÁREZ
   LA SEÑORA DE POLICHINELA    » ALBA
   COLOMBINA                   » PARDO
   LAURA                       » TOSCANO
   RISELA                     SRA. BELTRÁN
   LEANDRO                    SRTA. DOMUS
   CRISPÍN                    SR. PUGA
   EL DOCTOR                   » RUBIO
   POLICHINELA                 » MORA
   ARLEQUÍN                    » BARRAYCOA
   EL CAPITÁN                  » R. DE LA MATA
   PANTALÓN                    » SIMÓ-RASO
   EL HOSTELERO                » PACHECO
   EL SECRETARIO               » ROMEA
   MOZO 1.º DE LA HOSTERÍA     » SUÁREZ (A.)
   ÍDEM 2.º                    » ENRÍQUEZ
   ALGUACILILLO 1.º            » DE DIEGO
   ÍDEM 2.º                    » SUÁREZ (A.)

La acción pasa en un país imaginario, a principios
del siglo XVII




LOS INTERESES CREADOS

ACTO PRIMERO

PRÓLOGO

Telón corto en primer término,[39.1] con puerta al foro, y en ésta
un tapiz. Recitado por el personaje CRISPÍN.


He aquí el tinglado de la antigua farsa,[39.2] la que alivió en posadas
aldeanas el cansancio de los trajinantes, la que embobó en las plazas de
humildes lugares a los simples villanos, la que juntó en ciudades
populosas a los más variados concursos, como en París sobre el Puente
Nuevo,[39.3] cuando Tabarín[39.4] desde su tablado de feria solicitaba
la atención de todo transeúnte, desde el espetado doctor que detiene un
momento su docta cabalgadura para desarrugar por un instante la frente,
siempre cargada de graves pensamientos, al escuchar algún donaire de la
alegre farsa, hasta el pícaro hampón, que allí divierte sus ocios horas
y horas, engañando al hambre con la risa, y el prelado y la dama de
calidad y el gran señor desde sus carrozas, como la moza alegre y el
soldado y el mercader y el estudiante. Gente de toda condición, que en
ningún otro lugar se hubiera reunido, comunicábase allí su regocijo,
que[39.5] muchas veces, más que de la farsa, reía el grave de ver reír
al risueño, y el sabio al bobo, y los pobretes de ver reír a los grandes
señores, ceñudos de ordinario, y los grandes de ver reír a los pobretes,
tranquilizada su conciencia con pensar: ¡también los pobres ríen!
Que[40.1] nada prende tan pronto de unas almas en otras como esta
simpatía de la risa. Alguna vez, también subió la farsa a palacios de
príncipes, altísimos señores, por humorada de sus dueños, y no fue allí
menos libre y despreocupada. Fue de todos y para todos. Del pueblo
recogió burlas y malicias y dichos sentenciosos, de esa filosofía del
pueblo, que siempre sufre, dulcificada por aquella resignación de los
humildes de entonces, que no lo esperaban todo de este mundo, y por eso
sabían reírse del mundo sin odio y sin amargura. Ilustró después su
plebeyo origen con noble ejecutoria: Lope de Rueda, Shakespeare,
Molière,[40.2] como enamorados príncipes de cuento de hadas, elevaron a
Cenicienta al más alto trono de la Poesía y del Arte. No presume de tan
gloriosa estirpe esta farsa, que por curiosidad de su espíritu inquieto
os presenta un poeta de ahora. Es una farsa _guiñolesca_,[40.3] de
asunto disparatado, sin realidad alguna. Pronto veréis cómo cuanto en
ella sucede no pudo suceder nunca, que sus personajes no son ni semejan
hombres y mujeres, sino muñecos o fantoches de cartón y trapo, con
groseros hilos, visibles a poca luz y al más corto de vista. Son las
mismas grotescas máscaras de aquella comedia del Arte[40.4]
italiano[40.5], no tan regocijadas como solían, porque han meditado
mucho en tanto tiempo. Bien conoce el autor que tan primitivo
espectáculo no es el más digno de un culto auditorio de estos tiempos;
así, de vuestra cultura tanto como de vuestra bondad se ampara. El autor
sólo pide que aniñéis cuanto sea posible vuestro espíritu. El mundo está
ya viejo y chochea; el Arte no se resigna a envejecer, y por parecer
niño finge balbuceos... Y he aquí cómo estos viejos polichinelas
pretenden hoy divertiros con sus niñerías.[40.6]


Mutación

CUADRO PRIMERO


Plaza de una ciudad. A la derecha, en primer término, fachada de
una hostería con puerta practicable y en ella un aldabón. Encima de
la puerta un letrero que diga:[41.1] «Hostería.»


ESCENA PRIMERA

LEANDRO y CRISPÍN, que salen por la segunda izquierda.


LEANDRO. Gran ciudad ha de ser ésta, Crispín; en todo se advierte su
señoría y riqueza.

CRISPÍN. Dos ciudades hay. ¡Quiera el Cielo que en la mejor hayamos
dado![41.2]

LEANDRO. ¿Dos ciudades dices, Crispín? Ya entiendo, antigua y nueva, una
de cada parte del río.

CRISPÍN. ¿Qué importa el río ni la vejez ni la novedad? Digo dos
ciudades como en toda ciudad del mundo: una para el que llega con
dinero, y otra para el que llega como nosotros.

LEANDRO. ¡Harto es haber llegado sin tropezar con la Justicia! Y bien
quisiera detenerme aquí algún tiempo, que ya me cansa tanto correr
tierras.

CRISPÍN. A mí no, que es condición de los naturales, como yo, del libre
reino de Picardía[41.3] no hacer asiento en parte alguna, si no es
forzado y en galeras, que es duro asiento.[41.4] Pero ya que sobre esta
ciudad caímos y es plaza fuerte a lo que se descubre, tracemos como
prudentes capitanes nuestro plan de batalla si hemos de conquistarla con
provecho.

LEANDRO. ¡Mal pertrechado ejército venimos!

CRISPÍN. Hombres somos, y con hombres hemos de vernos.

LEANDRO. Por todo caudal, nuestra persona. No quisiste que nos
desprendiéramos de estos vestidos, que,[42.1] malvendiéndolos,
hubiéramos podido juntar algún dinero.

CRISPÍN. ¡Antes me desprendiera yo de la piel que de un buen vestido!
Que nada importa tanto como parecer, según va el mundo, y el vestido es
lo que antes parece.

LEANDRO. ¿Qué hemos de hacer, Crispín? Que el hambre y el cansancio me
tienen abatido, y mal discurro.

CRISPÍN. Aquí no hay sino valerse del ingenio y de la desvergüenza, que
sin ella nada vale el ingenio. Lo que he pensado es que tú has de hablar
poco y desabrido,[42.2] para darte aires de persona de calidad; de vez
en cuando te permito que descargues algún golpe sobre mis costillas; a
cuantos te pregunten, responde misterioso; y cuando hables por tu
cuenta, sea con gravedad; como si sentenciaras. Eres joven, de buena
presencia; hasta ahora sólo supiste malgastar tus cualidades; ya es hora
de aprovecharse de ellas. Ponte en mis manos, que nada conviene tanto a
un hombre como llevar a su lado quien haga notar sus méritos, que en uno
mismo la modestia es necedad y la propia alabanza locura, y con las dos
se pierde para el mundo. Somos los hombres[42.3] como mercancía, que
valemos más o menos según la habilidad, del mercader que nos presenta.
Yo te aseguro que así[42.4] fueras vidrio, a mi cargo corre que pases
por diamante. Y ahora llamemos a esta hostería, que lo primero es
acampar a vista de la plaza.

LEANDRO. ¿A la hostería dices? ¿Y cómo pagaremos?

CRISPÍN. Si por tan poco te acobardas, busquemos un hospital o casa de
misericordia, o pidamos limosna, si a lo piadoso nos acogemos; y si a lo
bravo, volvamos al camino y salteemos al primer viandante; si a la
verdad de nuestros recursos nos atenemos, no son otros nuestros
recursos.

LEANDRO. Yo traigo cartas de introducción para personas de valimiento en
esta ciudad, que podrán socorrernos.

CRISPÍN. ¡Rompe luego esas cartas, y no pienses en tal bajeza!
¡Presentarnos a nadie como necesitados! ¡Buenas cartas de crédito son
ésas! Hoy te recibirán con grandes cortesías, te dirán que su casa y su
persona son tuyas, y a la segunda vez que llames a su puerta, ya te dirá
el criado que su señor no está en casa ni para en ella; y a otra visita,
ni te abrirán la puerta. Mundo es éste de toma y daca; lonja de
contratación, casa de cambio, y antes de pedir, ha de ofrecerse.

LEANDRO. ¿Y qué podré yo ofrecer si nada tengo?

CRISPÍN. ¡En qué poco te estimas! Pues qué, un hombre por sí, ¿nada
vale? Un hombre puede ser soldado, y con su valor decidir una victoria;
puede ser galán o marido, y con dulce medicina curar a alguna dama de
calidad o doncella de buen linaje que se sienta morir de melancolía;
puede ser criado de algún señor poderoso que se aficione de él y le
eleve hasta su privanza, y tantas cosas más que no he de enumerarte.
Para subir, cualquier escalón es bueno.

LEANDRO. ¿Y si aun ese escalón me falta?

CRISPÍN. Yo te ofrezco mis espaldas para encumbrarte. Tú te verás en
alto.

LEANDRO. ¿Y si los dos damos en tierra?

CRISPÍN. Que ella nos sea[44.1] leve. (_Llamando a la hostería con el
aldabón._) ¡Ah de la hostería! ¡Hola, digo! ¡Hostelero o demonio! ¿Nadie
responde? ¿Qué casa es ésta?

LEANDRO. ¿Por qué esas voces si apenas llamasteis?[44.2]

CRISPÍN. ¡Porque es ruindad hacer esperar de ese modo! (_Vuelve a llamar
más fuerte._) ¡Ah de la gente! ¡Ah de la casa! ¡Ah de todos los diablos!

HOSTELERO. (_Dentro._) ¿Quién va? ¿Qué voces y qué modos son éstos? No
hará tanto que esperan.

CRISPÍN. ¡Ya fue[44.3] mucho! Y bien nos informaron que es ésta muy ruin
posada para gente noble.


ESCENA II

DICHOS, el HOSTELERO y dos MOZOS que salen de la hostería.


HOSTELERO. (_Saliendo._) Poco a poco, que no es posada, sino hospedería,
y muy grandes señores han parado en ella.

CRISPÍN. Quisiera yo ver a ésos que llamáis[44.4] grandes señores.
Gentecilla de poco más o menos. Bien se advierte en esos mozos que no
saben conocer a las personas de calidad, y se[44.5] están ahí como
pasmarotes sin atender a nuestro servicio.

HOSTELERO. ¡Por vida que sois impertinente!

LEANDRO. Este criado mío siempre ha de extremar su celo. Buena es
vuestra posada para el poco tiempo que he de parar en ella. Disponed
luego un aposento para mí y otro para este criado, y ahorremos palabras.

HOSTELERO. Perdonad, señor; si antes hubierais hablado... Siempre los
señores han de ser más comedidos que sus criados.

CRISPÍN. Es que este buen señor mío a todo se acomoda; pero yo sé lo que
conviene a su servicio, y no he de pasar por cosa mal hecha. Conducidnos
ya al aposento.

HOSTELERO. ¿No traéis bagaje alguno?

CRISPÍN. ¿Pensáis que nuestro bagaje es hatillo de soldado o de
estudiante para traerlo a mano, ni que mi señor ha de traer aquí ocho
carros, que tras nosotros vienen, ni que aquí ha de parar sino el tiempo
preciso que conviene al secreto de los servicios que en esta ciudad le
están encomendados?...

LEANDRO. ¿No callarás? ¿Qué secreto ha de haber contigo? ¡Pues voto a...
que si alguien me descubre por tu hablar sin medida...! (_Le amenaza y
le pega con la espada._)

CRISPÍN. ¡Valedme, que[45.1] me matará! (_Corriendo._)

HOSTELERO. (_Interponiéndose entre Leandro y Crispín._) ¡Teneos, señor!

LEANDRO. Dejad que le castigue, que no hay falta para mí como el hablar
sin tino.

HOSTELERO. ¡No le castiguéis, señor!

LEANDRO. ¡Dejadme, dejadme, que no aprenderá nunca! (_Al ir a pegar a
Crispín, éste se esconde detrás del Hostelero, quien recibe los
golpes._)

CRISPÍN. (_Quejándose._)¡Ay, ay, ay!

HOSTELERO. ¡Ay, digo yo, que me dio de plano!

LEANDRO. (_A Crispín._) Ve a lo que[45.2] diste lugar; a que este
infeliz fuera el golpeado. ¡Pídele perdón!

HOSTELERO. No es menester. Yo le perdono gustoso. (_A los criados._)
¿Qué hacéis ahí parados? Disponed los aposentos donde suele parar el
embajador de Mantua y preparad comida para este caballero.

CRISPÍN. Dejad que yo les advierta de todo, que cometerán mil torpezas
y pagaré yo luego, que mi señor, como veis, no perdona falta... Soy con
vosotros,[46.1] muchachos... Y tened cuenta a quien servís, que la mayor
fortuna o la mayor desdicha os entró por las puertas. (_Entran los
criados y Crispín en la hostería._)

HOSTELERO. (_A Leandro._) ¿Y podéis decirme vuestro nombre, de dónde
venís y a qué propósito?...

LEANDRO. (_Al ver salir a Crispín de la hostería._) Mi criado os lo
dirá... Y aprended a no importunarme con preguntas... (_Entra en la
hostería._)

CRISPÍN. ¡Buena la hicisteis![46.2] ¿Atreverse a preguntar a mi señor?
Si os importa tenerle una hora siquiera en vuestra casa, no volváis a
dirigirle la palabra.

HOSTELERO. Sabed que hay Ordenanzas[46.3] muy severas que así lo
disponen.

CRISPÍN. ¡Veníos[46.4] con Ordenanzas a mi señor! ¡Callad, callad, que
no sabéis a quién tenéis en vuestra casa, y si lo supierais no diríais
tantas impertinencias!

HOSTELERO. ¿Pero no he de saber siquiera...?

CRISPÍN. ¡Voto a..., que llamaré a mi señor y él os dirá lo que
conviene, si no lo entendisteis! ¡Cuidad de que nada le falte y
atendedle con vuestros cinco sentidos, que bien puede pesaros! ¿No
sabéis conocer a las personas? ¿No visteis ya quién es mi señor? ¿Qué
replicáis? ¡Vamos ya! (_Entra en la hostería empujando al Hostelero._)


ESCENA III

ARLEQUÍN y el CAPITÁN, que salen por la segunda izquierda.


ARLEQUÍN. Vagando por los campos que rodean esta ciudad, lo mejor de
ella sin duda alguna, creo que sin pensarlo hemos venido a dar frente a
la hostería. ¡Animal de costumbre es el hombre! ¡Y dura costumbre la de
alimentarse cada día!

CAPITÁN. ¡La dulce música de vuestros versos me distrajo de mis
pensamientos! ¡Amable privilegio de los poetas!

ARLEQUÍN. ¡Que no les impide carecer de todo! Con temor llego a la
hostería. ¿Consentirán hoy en fiarnos? ¡Válgame vuestra espada!

CAPITÁN. ¿Mi espada? Mi espada de soldado como vuestro plectro de poeta,
nada valen en esta ciudad de mercaderes y de negociantes... ¡Triste
condición es la nuestra!

ARLEQUÍN. Bien decís. No la sublime poesía, que sólo canta de nobles y
elevados asuntos; ya ni sirve poner el ingenio a las plantas de los
poderosos para elogiarlos o satirizarlos; alabanzas o diatribas no
tienen valor para ellos; ni agradecen las unas ni temen las otras. El
propio Aretino[47.1] hubiera muerto de hambre en estos tiempos.

CAPITÁN. ¿Y nosotros, decidme? Porque fuimos vencidos en las últimas
guerras, más que por el enemigo poderoso, por esos indignos traficantes
que nos gobiernan y nos enviaron a defender sus intereses sin fuerzas y
sin entusiasmo, porque nadie combate con fe por lo que no estima; ellos,
que no dieron uno de los suyos para soldado ni soltaron moneda sino a
buen interés y a mejor cuenta, y apenas temieron verla perdida
amenazaron con hacer causa con el enemigo, ahora nos culpan a nosotros y
nos maltratan y nos menosprecian y quisieran ahorrarse la mísera soldada
con que creen pagarnos, y de muy buena gana nos despedirían si no
temieran que un día todos los oprimidos por sus maldades y tiranías se
levantaran contra ellos. ¡Pobres de ellos[48.1] si ese día nos
acordamos de qué parte están la razón y la justicia!

ARLEQUÍN. Si así fuera..., ese día me tendréis a vuestro lado.

CAPITÁN. Con los poetas no hay que contar para nada, que es vuestro
espíritu como el ópalo, que a cada luz hace diversos visos. Hoy os
apasionáis por lo que nace y mañana por lo que muere; pero más
inclinados sois a enamoraros de todo lo ruinoso por melancólico.[48.2] Y
como sois por lo regular poco madrugadores, más veces visteis morir el
sol que amanecer el día, y más sabéis de sus ocasos que de sus auroras.

ARLEQUÍN. No lo diréis por mí, que he visto amanecer muchas veces cuando
no tenía donde acostarme. ¿Y cómo queríais que cantara al día, alegre
como alondra, si amanecía tan triste para mí? ¿Os decidís a probar
fortuna?

CAPITÁN. ¡Qué remedio! Sentémonos, y sea lo que disponga nuestro buen
hostelero.

ARLEQUÍN. ¡Hola! ¡Eh! ¿Quién sirve? (_Llamando en la hostería._)


ESCENA IV

DICHOS; el HOSTELERO. Después los MOZOS, LEANDRO y CRISPÍN, que
salen a su tiempo de la hostería.


HOSTELERO. ¡Ah, caballeros! ¿Sois vosotros?[48.3] Mucho lo siento, pero
hoy no puedo servir a nadie en mi hostería.

CAPITÁN. ¿Y por qué causa, si puede saberse?

HOSTELERO. ¡Lindo desahogo es el vuestro en preguntarlo! ¿Pensáis que a
mí me fía nadie lo que en mi casa se gasta?

CAPITÁN. ¡Ah! ¿Es ése el motivo? ¿Y no somos personas de crédito a quien
puede fiarse?

HOSTELERO. Para mí, no. Y como nunca pensé cobrar, para favor ya fue
bastante; conque así, hagan merced[49.1] de no volver por mi casa.

ARLEQUÍN. ¿Creéis que todo es dinero en este bajo mundo? ¿Contáis por
nada las ponderaciones que de vuestra casa hicimos en todas partes?
¡Hasta un soneto os tengo dedicado,[49.2] y en él celebro vuestras
perdices estofadas y vuestros pasteles de liebre!... Y en cuanto al
señor Capitán, tened por seguro que él solo sostendrá contra un ejército
el buen nombre de vuestra casa. ¿Nada vale esto? ¡Todo ha de ser moneda
contante en el mundo!

HOSTELERO. ¡No estoy para burlas! No he menester[49.3] de vuestros
sonetos ni de la espada del señor Capitán, que mejor pudiera emplearla.

CAPITÁN. ¡Voto a..., que sí la emplearé escarmentando a un pícaro!
(_Amenazándole y pegándole con la espada._)

HOSTELERO. (_Gritando._) ¿Qué es esto? ¿Contra mí? ¡Favor! ¡Justicia!

ARLEQUÍN. (_Conteniendo al Capitán._) ¡No os perdáis por tan ruin
sujeto!

CAPITÁN. He de matarle. (_Pegándole._)

HOSTELERO. ¡Favor! ¡Justicia!

MOZOS. (_Saliendo de la hostería._) ¡Que matan a nuestro amo!

HOSTELERO. ¡Socorredme!

CAPITÁN. ¡No dejaré uno!

HOSTELERO. ¿No vendrá nadie?

LEANDRO. (_Saliendo con Crispín._) ¿Qué alboroto es éste?

CRISPÍN. ¿En lugar donde mi señor se hospeda? ¿No hay sosiego posible en
vuestra casa? Yo traeré a la Justicia, que pondrá orden en ello.

HOSTELERO. ¡Esto ha de ser mi ruina! ¡Con tan gran señor en mi casa!

ARLEQUÍN. ¿Quién es él?

HOSTELERO. ¡No oséis preguntarlo!

CAPITÁN. Perdonad, señor, si turbamos vuestro reposo; pero este ruin
hostelero...

HOSTELERO. No fue mía la culpa, señor, sino de estos desvergonzados...

CAPITÁN. ¿A mí desvergonzado? ¡No miraré nada![50.1]...

CRISPÍN. ¡Alto, señor Capitán, que aquí tenéis quien satisfaga vuestros
agravios, si los tenéis de este hombre!

HOSTELERO. Figuraos que ha[50.2] más de un mes que comen a mi costa sin
soltar blanca, y porque me negué hoy a servirles se vuelven contra mí.

ARLEQUÍN. Yo no, que todo lo llevo con paciencia.

CAPITÁN. ¿Y es razón que a un soldado no se le haga crédito?

ARLEQUÍN. ¿Y es razón que en nada se estime un soneto con estrambote que
compuse a sus perdices estofadas y a sus pasteles de liebre?... Todo por
fe, que no los probé nunca, sino carnero y potajes.

CRISPÍN. Estos dos nobles señores dicen muy bien, y es indignidad tratar
de ese modo a un poeta y a un soldado.

ARLEQUÍN. ¡Ah, señor; sois un[50.3] alma grande!

CRISPÍN. Yo, no. Mi señor, aquí presente; que como tan gran señor, nada
hay para él en el mundo como un poeta y un soldado.

LEANDRO. Cierto.

CRISPÍN. Y estad seguros de que mientras él pare en esta ciudad no
habéis de carecer de nada, y cuanto gasto hagáis aquí corre de su
cuenta.

LEANDRO. Cierto.

CRISPÍN. ¡Y mírese[51.1] mucho el hostelero en trataros como
corresponde!

HOSTELERO. ¡Señor!

CRISPÍN. Y no seáis tan avaro de vuestras perdices ni de vuestras
empanadas de gato, que no es razón que un poeta como el señor Arlequín
hable por sueño de cosas tan palpables...

ARLEQUÍN. ¿Conocéis mi nombre?

CRISPÍN. Yo, no; pero mi señor, como tan gran señor, conoce a cuantos
poetas existen y existieron, siempre que sean dignos de ese nombre.

LEANDRO. Cierto.

CRISPÍN. Y ninguno tan grande como vos, señor Arlequín; y cada vez que
pienso que aquí no se os ha guardado todo el respeto que merecéis...

HOSTELERO. Perdonad, señor. Yo les serviré como mandáis, y basta que
seáis su fiador...

CAPITÁN. Señor, si en algo puedo serviros...

CRISPÍN. ¿Es poco servicio el conoceros? ¡Glorioso Capitán, digno de ser
cantado por este solo poeta!...

ARLEQUÍN. ¡Señor!

CAPITÁN. ¡Señor!

ARLEQUÍN. ¿Y os son conocidos mis versos?

CRISPÍN. ¿Cómo conocidos?[51.2] ¡Olvidados los tengo![51.3] ¿No es
vuestro aquel soneto admirable que empieza:

    «La dulce mano que acaricia y mata»?

ARLEQUÍN. ¿Cómo decís?

CRISPÍN. «La dulce mano que acaricia y mata.»

ARLEQUÍN. ¿Ése decís? No, no es mío ese soneto.

CRISPÍN. Pues merece ser vuestro. Y de vos,[52.1] Capitán, ¿quién no
conoce las hazañas? ¿No fuisteis el que sólo con veinte hombres asaltó
el castillo de las Peñas Rojas en la famosa batalla de los Campos
Negros?

CAPITÁN. ¿Sabéis...?

CRISPÍN. ¿Cómo si sabemos?[52.2] ¡Oh! ¡Cuántas veces se lo oí referir a
mi señor entusiasmado! Veinte hombres, veinte y vos delante, y desde el
castillo... ¡bum! ¡bum! ¡bum!, disparos, y bombardas, y pez hirviente, y
demonios encendidos... ¡Y los veinte hombres como un solo hombre y vos
delante! Y los de arriba... ¡bum! ¡bum! ¡bum! Y los tambores... ¡ran,
rataplán, plan! Y los clarines... ¡tararí, tarí, tarí!... Y vosotros
sólo con vuestra espada y vos[52.3] sin espada... ¡ris, ris, ris!, golpe
aquí, golpe allí..., una cabeza, un brazo... (_Empieza a golpes con la
espada, dándole de plano al Hostelero y a los Mozos._)

MOZOS. ¡Ay, ay!

HOSTELERO. ¡Téngase, que se apasiona como si pasara!

CRISPÍN. ¿Cómo si me apasiono? Siempre sentí yo el _animus belli_.

CAPITÁN. No parece sino que os hallasteis presente.

CRISPÍN. Oírselo referir a mi señor, es como verlo, mejor que verlo. ¡Y
a un soldado así, al héroe de las Peñas Rojas en los Campos Negros se le
trata de esa manera!... ¡Ah! Gran suerte fue que mi señor se hallase
presente, y que negocios de importancia le hayan traído a esta ciudad,
donde él hará que se os trate[52.4] con respeto, como merecéis... ¡Un
poeta tan alto, un tan gran capitán! (_A los Mozos._) ¡Pronto! ¿Qué
hacéis ahí como estafermos? Servidles de lo mejor que haya en vuestra
casa, y ante todo una botella del mejor vino, que mí señor quiere beber
con estos caballeros, y lo tendrá a gloria... ¿Qué hacéis ahí? ¡Pronto!

HOSTELERO. ¡Voy, voy! ¡No he librado de mala![53.1] (_Se va con los
Mozos a la hostería_.)

ARLEQUÍN. ¡Ah, señor! ¿Cómo agradeceros[53.2]...?

CAPITÁN. ¿Cómo pagaros...?

CRISPÍN. ¡Nadie hable aquí de pagar, que es palabra que ofende! Sentaos,
sentaos, que para mi señor, que a tantos príncipes y grandes ha sentado
a su mesa, será éste el mayor orgullo.

LEANDRO. Cierto.

CRISPÍN. Mi señor no es de muchas palabras; pero, como veis, esas pocas
son otras tantas sentencias llenas de sabiduría.

ARLEQUÍN. En todo muestra su grandeza.

CAPITÁN. No sabéis cómo conforta nuestro abatido espíritu hallar un gran
señor como vos, que así nos considera.

CRISPÍN. Esto no es nada, que yo sé que mi señor no se contenta con tan
poco y será capaz de llevaros consigo y colocaros en tan alto estado...

LEANDRO. (_Aparte a Crispín._) No te alargues en palabras, Crispín...

CRISPÍN. Mi señor no gusta de palabras, pero ya le conoceréis por las
obras.

HOSTELERO. (_Saliendo con los Mozos, que traen las viandas y ponen la
mesa._) Aquí está el vino... y la comida.

CRISPÍN. ¡Beban, beban y coman y no se priven de nada, que mi señor
corre con todo, y si algo os falta, no dudéis en decirlo, que mi señor
pondrá orden en ello, que el hostelero es dado a descuidarse!

HOSTELERO. No por cierto; pero comprenderéis...

CRISPÍN. No digáis palabra, que diréis una impertinencia.

CAPITÁN. ¡A vuestra salud!

LEANDRO. ¡A la vuestra, señores! ¡Por el más grande poeta y el mejor
soldado!

ARLEQUÍN. ¡Por el más noble señor!

CAPITÁN. ¡Por el más generoso!

CRISPÍN. Y yo también he de beber, aunque sea atrevimiento. Por este día
grande entre todos que juntó al más alto poeta, al más valiente capitán,
al más noble señor y al más leal criado... Y permitid que mi señor se
despida, que los negocios que le traen a esta ciudad no admiten demora.

LEANDRO. Cierto.

CRISPÍN. ¿No faltaréis a presentarle vuestros respetos cada día?

ARLEQUÍN. Y a cada hora; y he de juntar a todos los músicos y poetas de
mi amistad para festejarle con música y canciones.

CAPITÁN. Y yo he de traer a toda mi compañía con antorchas y luminarias.

LEANDRO. Ofenderéis mi modestia...

CRISPÍN. Y ahora, comed, bebed... ¡Pronto! Servid a estos señores...
(_Aparte al Capitán._) Entre nosotros..., ¿estaréis sin blanca?

CAPITÁN. ¿Qué hemos de deciros?

CRISPÍN. ¡No digáis más! (_Al Hostelero._) ¡Eh! ¡Aquí! Entregaréis a
estos caballeros cuarenta o cincuenta escudos por encargo de mi señor y
de parte suya... ¡No dejéis de cumplir sus órdenes!

HOSTELERO. ¡Descuidad! ¿Cuarenta o cincuenta, decís?

CRISPÍN. Poned sesenta... ¡Caballeros, salud!

CAPITÁN. ¡Viva el más grande caballero!

ARLEQUÍN. ¡Viva!

CRISPÍN. ¡Decid ¡viva! también vosotros, gente incivil!

HOSTELERO Y MOZOS. ¡Viva!

CRISPÍN. ¡Viva el más alto poeta y el mayor soldado!

TODOS. ¡Viva!

LEANDRO. (_Aparte a Crispín._) ¿Qué locuras son éstas, Crispín, y cómo
saldremos de ellas?

CRISPÍN. Como entramos. Ya lo ves; la poesía y las armas son nuestras...
¡Adelante! ¡Sigamos la conquista del mundo! (_Todos se hacen saludos y
reverencias, y Leandro y Crispín se van por la segunda izquierda. El
Capitán y Arlequín se disponen a comer los asados que les han preparado
el Hostelero y los Mozos que los sirven._)


Mutación

CUADRO SEGUNDO

Jardín con fachada de un pabellón, con puerta practicable en primer
término izquierda. Es de noche.


ESCENA PRIMERA


DOÑA SIRENA y COLOMBINA saliendo del pabellón.


SIRENA. ¿No hay para[55.1] perder el juicio, Colombina? ¡Que una dama se
vea[55.2] en trance tan afrentoso por gente baja y descomedida! ¿Cómo te
atreviste a volver a mi presencia con tales razones?

COLOMBINA. ¿Y no habíais de saberlo?

SIRENA. ¡Morir me estaría mejor! ¿Y todos te dijeron lo mismo?

COLOMBINA. Uno por uno y como lo oísteis... El sastre, que no os enviará
el vestido mientras no le paguéis todo lo adeudado.

SIRENA. ¡El insolente! ¡El salteador de caminos! ¡Cuando es él quien me
debe todo su crédito en esta ciudad, que hasta emplearlo yo[56.1] en el
atavío de mi persona no supo lo que era vestir damas!

COLOMBINA. Y los cocineros y los músicos y los criados todos dijeron lo
mismo; que no servirán esta noche en la fiesta si no les pagáis por
adelantado.

SIRENA. ¡Los sayones! ¡Los foragidos! ¡Cuándo se vio tanta insolencia en
gente nacida para servirnos! ¿Es que ya no se paga más que con dinero?
¿Es que ya sólo se estima el dinero en el mundo? ¡Triste de[56.2] la que
se ve como yo, sin el amparo de un marido, ni de parientes, ni de
allegados masculinos!... Que una mujer sola nada vale en el mundo por
noble y virtuosa que sea. ¡Oh, tiempos de perdición! ¡Tiempos del
Apocalipsis! ¡El Anticristo debe ser llegado![56.3]

COLOMBINA. Nunca os vi tan apocada. Os desconozco. De mayores apuros
supisteis salir adelante.

SIRENA. Eran otros tiempos, Colombina. Contaba yo entonces con mi
juventud y con mi belleza como poderosos aliados. Príncipes y grandes
señores rendíanse a mis plantas.

COLOMBINA. En cambio, no sería[56.4] tanta vuestra experiencia y
conocimiento del mundo como ahora. Y en cuanto a vuestra belleza, nunca
estuvo tan en su punto, podéis creerlo.

SIRENA. ¡Deja lisonjas! ¡Cuándo me vería yo de este modo si fuera la
doña Sirena de mis veinte![56.5]

COLOMBINA. ¿Años queréis decir?

SIRENA. ¿Pues qué pensaste? ¡Y qué diré de ti, que aun no los cumpliste
y no sabes aprovecharlo! ¡Nunca lo creyera[57.1] cuando al verme tan
sola de criada te adopté por sobrina! Si en vez de malograr tu juventud
enamorándote de ese Arlequín, ese poeta que nada puede ofrecerte sino
versos y músicas, supieras emplearte mejor, no nos veríamos en tan
triste caso.

COLOMBINA. ¿Qué queréis? Aun soy demasiado joven para resignarme a ser
amada y no corresponder. Y si he de adiestrarme en hacer padecer por mi
amor, necesito saber antes cómo se padece cuando se ama. Yo sabré
desquitarme. Aun no cumplí los veinte años. No me creáis con tan poco
juicio que piense en casarme con Arlequín.

SIRENA. No me fío de ti, que eres muy caprichosa y siempre te dejaste
llevar de la fantasía. Pero pensemos en lo que ahora importa. ¿Qué
haremos en tan gran apuro? No tardarán en acudir mis convidados, todos
personas de calidad y de importancia, y entre ellas el señor Polichinela
con su esposa y su hija, que por muchas razones me importan más que
todos. Ya sabes cómo frecuentan esta casa algunos caballeros
nobilísimos, pero, como yo, harto deslucidos en su nobleza por falta de
dinero. Para cualquiera de ellos, la hija del señor Polichinela, con su
riquísima dote y el gran caudal que ha de heredar a la muerte de su
padre, puede ser un partido muy ventajoso. Muchos son los que la
pretenden. En favor de todos ellos interpongo yo mi buena amistad con el
señor Polichinela y su esposa. Cualquiera que sea el favorecido, yo sé
que ha de corresponder con largueza a mis buenos oficios, que de todos
me hice firmar una obligación para asegurarme. Ya no me quedan otros
medios que estas mediaciones para reponer en algo mi patrimonio; si de
camino algún rico comerciante o mercader se prendara de ti..., ¿quién
sabe?..., aun podía ser esta casa lo que fue en otro tiempo. Pero si
esta noche la insolencia de esa gente trasciende, si no puedo ofrecer la
fiesta... ¡No quiero pensarlo!..., ¡que será mi ruina!

COLOMBINA. No paséis cuidado. Con qué agasajarlos no ha de faltar. Y en
cuanto a músicos y a criados, el señor Arlequín, que por algo es poeta y
para algo está enamorado de mí, sabrá improvisarlo todo. Él conoce a
muchos truhanes de buen humor que han de prestarse a todo. Ya veréis, no
faltará nada, y vuestros convidados dirán que no asistieron en su vida a
tan maravillosa fiesta.

SIRENA. ¡Ay, Colombina! Si eso fuera, ¡cuánto ganarías en mi afecto!
Corre en busca de tu poeta... No hay que perder tiempo.

COLOMBINA. ¿Mi poeta? Del otro lado de estos jardines pasea, de seguro,
aguardando una seña mía...

SIRENA. No será bien que asista a vuestra entrevista, que yo no debo
rebajarme en solicitar tales favores... A tu cargo lo dejo. ¡Que nada
falte para la fiesta, y yo sabré recompensar a todos; que esta estrechez
angustiosa de ahora no puede durar siempre... o no sería yo doña Sirena!

COLOMBINA. Todo se compondrá. Id descuidada. (_Vase doña Sirena por el
pabellón._)


ESCENA II

COLOMBINA, después CRISPÍN, que sale por la segunda derecha.


COLOMBINA. (_Dirigiéndose a la segunda derecha y llamando._) ¡Arlequín!
¡Arlequín! (_Al ver salir a Crispín._) ¡No es él!

CRISPÍN. No temáis, hermosa Colombina, amada del más soberano ingenio,
que por ser raro poeta en todo, no quiso extremar en sus versos las
ponderaciones de vuestra belleza. Si de lo vivo a lo pintado fue siempre
diferencia, es toda en esta ocasión ventaja de lo vivo, ¡con ser
tal[59.1] la pintura!

COLOMBINA. Y vos, ¿sois también poeta, o sólo cortesano y lisonjero?

CRISPÍN. Soy el mejor amigo de vuestro enamorado Arlequín, aunque sólo
de hoy le conozco, pero tales pruebas tuvo de mi amistad en tan corto
tiempo. Mi mayor deseo fue el de saludaros, y el señor Arlequín no
anduviera[59.2] tan discreto en complacerme a no fiar tanto[59.3] de mi
amistad, que sin ella, fuera ponerme a riesgo de amaros sólo con haberme
puesto en ocasión de veros.

COLOMBINA. El señor Arlequín fiaba tanto en el amor que le tengo como en
la amistad que le tenéis. No pongáis todo el mérito de vuestra parte,
que es tan necia presunción perdonar la vida a los hombres como el
corazón a las mujeres.

CRISPÍN. Ahora advierto que no sois tan peligrosa al que os ve como al
que llega a escucharos.

COLOMBINA. Permitid; pero antes de la fiesta preparada para esta noche
he de hablar con el señor Arlequín, y...

CRISPÍN. No es preciso. A eso vine, enviado de su parte y de parte de mi
señor, que os besa las manos.

COLOMBINA. ¿Y quién es vuestro señor, si puede saberse?

CRISPÍN. El más noble caballero, el más poderoso... Permitid que por
ahora calle su nombre; pronto habéis de conocerle. Mi señor desea
saludar a doña Sirena y asistir a su fiesta esta noche.

COLOMBINA. ¡La fiesta! ¿No sabéis...?

CRISPÍN. Lo sé. Mi deber es averiguarlo todo. Sé que hubo inconvenientes
que pudieron estorbarla; pero no habrá ninguno, todo está prevenido.

COLOMBINA. ¿Cómo sabéis...?

CRISPÍN. Yo os aseguro que no faltará nada. Suntuoso agasajo, luminarias
y fuegos de artificio, músicos y cantores. Será la más lucida fiesta del
mundo...

COLOMBINA. ¿Sois algún encantador por ventura?

CRISPÍN. Ya me iréis conociendo.[60.1] Sólo os diré que por algo juntó
hoy el destino a gente de tan buen entendimiento, incapaz de malograrlo
con vanos escrúpulos. Mi señor sabe que esta noche asistirá a la fiesta
el señor Polichinela, con su hija única, la hermosa Silvia, el mejor
partido de esta ciudad. Mi señor ha de enamorarla, mi señor ha de
casarse con ella y mi señor sabrá pagar como corresponde los buenos
oficios de doña Sirena y los vuestros también si os prestáis a
favorecerle.

COLOMBINA. No andáis con rodeos. Debiera ofenderme vuestro atrevimiento.

CRISPÍN. El tiempo apremia y no me dio lugar a ser comedido.

COLOMBINA. Si ha de juzgarse del amo por el criado...

CRISPÍN. No temáis. A mi amo le hallaréis el más cortés y atento
caballero. Mi desvergüenza le permite a él mostrarse vergonzoso. Duras
necesidades de la vida pueden obligar al más noble caballero a empleos
de rufián, como a la más noble dama a bajos oficios, y esta mezcla de
ruindad y nobleza en un mismo sujeto desluce con el mundo. Habilidad es
mostrar separado en dos sujetos lo que suele andar junto en uno solo.
Mi señor y yo, con ser[61.1] uno mismo, somos cada uno una parte del
otro. ¡Si así fuera siempre![61.2] Todos llevamos en nosotros un gran
señor de altivos pensamientos, capaz de todo lo grande y de todo lo
bello... Y a su lado, el servidor humilde, el de las ruines obras, el
que ha de emplearse en las bajas acciones a que obliga la vida... Todo
el arte está en separarlos de tal modo, que cuando caemos en alguna
bajeza podamos decir siempre: no fue mía, no fui yo, fue mi criado. En
la mayor miseria de nuestra vida siempre hay algo en nosotros que quiere
sentirse superior a nosotros mismos. Nos despreciaríamos demasiado si no
creyésemos valer más que nuestra vida... Ya sabéis quién es mi señor: el
de los altivos pensamientos, el de los bellos sueños. Ya sabéis quién
soy yo: el de los ruines empleos, el que siempre, muy bajo, rastrea y
socava entre toda mentira y toda indignidad y toda miseria. Sólo hay
algo en mí que me redime y me eleva a mis propios ojos. Esta lealtad de
mi servidumbre, esta lealtad que se humilla y se arrastra para que otro
pueda volar y pueda ser siempre el señor de los altivos pensamientos, el
de los bellos sueños. (_Se oye música dentro._)

COLOMBINA. ¿Qué música es ésa?

CRISPÍN. La que mi señor trae a la fiesta, con todos sus pajes y todos
sus criados y toda una corte de poetas y cantores presididos por el
señor Arlequín, y toda una legión de soldados con el Capitán al frente
escoltándole con antorchas...

COLOMBINA. ¿Quién es vuestro señor, que tanto puede? Corro a prevenir a
mi señora...

CRISPÍN. No es preciso. Ella acude.


ESCENA III

DICHOS y DOÑA SIRENA, que sale por el pabellón.


SIRENA. ¿Qué es esto? ¿Quién previno esa música? ¿Qué tropel de gente
llega a nuestra puerta?

COLOMBINA. No preguntéis nada. Sabed que hoy llegó a esta ciudad un gran
señor, y es él quien os ofrece la fiesta esta noche. Su criado os
informará de todo. Yo aun no sabré deciros si hablé con un gran loco o
con un gran bribón. De cualquier modo, os aseguro que él es un hombre
extraordinario...

SIRENA. ¿Luego no fue Arlequín...?

COLOMBINA. No preguntéis... Todo es como cosa de magia...

CRISPÍN. Doña Sirena, mi señor os pide licencia para besaros las manos.
Tan alta señora y tan noble señor no han de entender en intrigas
impropias de su condición. Por eso, antes que él llegue a saludaros yo
he de decirlo todo. Yo sé de vuestra historia mil notables sucesos que,
referidos,[62.1] me asegurarían toda vuestra confianza... Pero fuera
impertinencia puntualizarlos. Mi amo os asegura aquí (_Entregándola un
papel_) con su firma la obligación que ha de cumpliros si de vuestra
parte sabéis cumplir lo que aquí os propone.

SIRENA. ¿Qué papel y qué obligación es ésta?... (_Leyendo el papel para
sí._) ¡Cómo! ¿Cien mil escudos de presente y otros tantos a la muerte
del señor Polichinela si llega a casarse con su hija? ¿Qué insolencia es
ésta? ¿A una dama? ¿Sabéis con quién habláis? ¿Sabéis qué casa es ésta?

CRISPÍN. Doña Sirena..., ¡excusad la indignación! No hay nadie presente
que pueda importaros. Guardad ese papel junto con otros..., y no se
hable más del asunto. Mi señor no os propone nada indecoroso ni vos
consentiríais en ello... Cuanto aquí suceda será obra de la casualidad y
del amor. Fui yo, el criado, el único que tramó estas cosas indignas.
Vos sois siempre la noble dama, mi amo el noble señor, que al
encontraros esta noche en la fiesta, hablaréis de mil cosas galantes y
delicadas, mientras vuestros convidados pasean y conversan a vuestro
alrededor, con admiraciones a la hermosura de las damas, al arte de sus
galas, a la esplendidez del agasajo, a la dulzura de la música y a la
gracia de los bailarines... ¿Y quién se atreverá a decir que no es esto
todo? ¿No es así la vida, una fiesta en que la música sirve para
disimular palabras y las palabras para disimular pensamientos? Que la
música suene incesante, que la conversación se anime con alegres risas,
que la cena esté bien servida..., es todo lo que importa a los
convidados. Y ved aquí a mi señor que llega a saludaros con toda
gentileza.


ESCENA IV

DICHOS, LEANDRO, ARLEQUÍN y el CAPITÁN, que salen por la segunda
derecha.


LEANDRO. Doña Sirena, bésoos las manos.

SIRENA. Caballero...

LEANDRO. Mi criado os habrá dicho en mi nombre cuanto yo pudiera
deciros.

CRISPÍN. Mi señor, como persona grave, es de pocas palabras. Su
admiración es muda.

ARLEQUÍN. Pero sabe admirar sabiamente.

CAPITÁN. El verdadero mérito.

ARLEQUÍN. El verdadero valor.

CAPITÁN. El arte incomparable de la poesía.

ARLEQUÍN. La noble ciencia militar.

CAPITÁN. En todo muestra su grandeza.

ARLEQUÍN. Es el más noble caballero del mundo.

CAPITÁN. Mi espada siempre estará a su servicio.

ARLEQUÍN. He de consagrar a su gloria mi mejor poema.

CRISPÍN. Basta, basta, que ofenderéis su natural modestia. Vedle cómo
quisiera ocultarse y desaparecer. Es una violeta.

SIRENA. No necesita hablar quien de este modo hace hablar a todos en su
alabanza. (_Después de un saludo y reverencia se van todos por la
primera derecha. A Colombina._) ¿Qué piensas de todo esto, Colombina?

COLOMBINA. Que el caballero tiene muy gentil figura y el criado muy
gentil desvergüenza.

SIRENA. Todo puede aprovecharse. O yo no sé nada del mundo ni de los
hombres, o la fortuna se entró[64.1] hoy por mis puertas.

COLOMBINA. Pues segura es entonces la fortuna; porque del mundo sabéis
algo, y de los hombres, ¡no se diga!

SIRENA. Risela y Laura, que son las primeras en llegar...

COLOMBINA. ¿Cuándo fueron ellas las últimas en llegar a una fiesta? Os
dejo en su compañía, que yo no quiero perder de vista a nuestro
caballero... (_Vase por la primera derecha._)


ESCENA V

DOÑA SIRENA, LAURA y RISELA, que salen por la segunda derecha.


SIRENA. ¡Amigas! Ya comenzaba a dolerme de vuestra ausencia.

LAURA. ¿Pues es tan tarde?

SIRENA. Siempre lo es para veros.

RISELA. Otras dos fiestas dejamos por no faltar a vuestra casa.

LAURA. Por más que alguien nos dijo que no sería esta noche por hallaros
algo indispuesta.

SIRENA. Sólo por dejar mal a los maldicientes, aun muriendo la hubiera
tenido.

RISELA. Y nosotras nos hubiéramos muerto y no hubiéramos dejado de
asistir a ella.

LAURA. ¿No sabéis la novedad?

RISELA. No se habla de otra cosa.

LAURA. Dicen que ha llegado un personaje misterioso. Unos dicen que es
embajador secreto de Venecia o de Francia.

RISELA. Otros dicen que viene a buscar esposa para el Gran Turco.

LAURA. Aseguran que es lindo como un Adonis.

RISELA. Si nos fuera posible conocerle... Debisteis invitarle a vuestra
fiesta.

SIRENA. No fue preciso, amigas, que él mismo envió un embajador a pedir
licencia para ser recibido. Y en mi casa está y le veréis muy pronto.

LAURA. ¿Qué decís? Ved si anduvimos[65.1] acertadas en dejarlo todo por
asistir a vuestra casa.

RISELA. ¡Cuántas nos envidiarán esta noche!

LAURA. Todos rabian por conocerle.

SIRENA. Pues yo nada hice por lograrlo. Bastó que él supiera que yo
tenía fiesta en mi casa.

RISELA. Siempre fue lo mismo con vos. No llega persona importante a la
ciudad que luego no os ofrezca sus respetos.

LAURA. Ya se me tarda en verle[66.1]... Llevadnos a su presencia por
vuestra vida.

RISELA. Sí, sí, llevadnos.

SIRENA. Permitid, que llega el señor Polichinela con su familia... Pero
id sin mí; no os será difícil hallarle.

RISELA. Sí, sí; vamos, Laura.

LAURA. Vamos, Risela. Antes de que aumente la confusión y no nos sea
posible acercarnos. (_Vanse por la primera derecha._)


ESCENA VI

DOÑA SIRENA, POLICHINELA, la SEÑORA de POLICHINELA y SILVIA, que salen
por la segunda derecha.


SIRENA. ¡Oh, señor Polichinela! Ya temí que no vendríais.[66.2] Hasta
ahora no comenzó para mí la fiesta.

POLICHINELA. No fue culpa mía la tardanza. Fue de mi mujer, que entre
cuarenta vestidos no supo nunca cuál ponerse.

SEÑORA DE POLICHINELA. Si por él fuera, me presentaría de cualquier
modo... Ved cómo vengo de sofocada[66.3] por apresurarme.

SIRENA. Venís hermosa como nunca.

POLICHINELA. Pues aún no trae la mitad de sus joyas. No podría con tanto
peso.

SIRENA. ¿Y quién mejor puede ufanarse con que[66.4] su esposa ostente
el fruto de una riqueza adquirida con vuestro trabajo?

SEÑORA DE POLICHINELA. Pero ¿no es hora ya de disfrutar de ella, como yo
le digo, y de tener más nobles aspiraciones? Figuraos que ahora quiere
casar a nuestra hija con un negociante.

SIRENA. ¡Oh, señor Polichinela! Vuestra hija merece mucho más que un
negociante. No hay que pensar en eso. No debéis sacrificar su corazón
por ningún interés. ¿Qué dices tú, Silvia?

POLICHINELA. Ella preferirá algún barbilindo, que, muy a pesar mío, es
muy dada a novelas y poesía.

SILVIA. Yo haré siempre lo que mi padre ordene, sí a mi madre no le
contraría y a mí no me disgusta.

SIRENA. Eso es hablar con juicio.

SEÑORA DE POLICHINELA. Tu padre piensa que sólo el dinero vale y se
estima en el mundo.

POLICHINELA. Yo pienso que sin dinero no hay cosa que valga ni se estime
en el mundo; que es el precio de todo.

SIRENA. ¡No habléis así! ¿Y las virtudes, y el saber, y la nobleza?

POLICHINELA. Todo tiene su precio, ¿quién lo duda? Nadie mejor que yo lo
sabe, que compré mucho de todo eso, y no muy caro.

SIRENA. ¡Oh, señor Polichinela! Es humorada vuestra. Bien sabéis que el
dinero no es todo, y que si vuestra hija se enamorara de algún noble
caballero, no sería bien contrariarla. Yo sé que tenéis un sensible
corazón de padre.

POLICHINELA. Eso sí. Por mi hija sería yo capaz de todo.

SIRENA. ¿Hasta de arruinaros?

POLICHINELA. Eso no sería una prueba de cariño. Antes sería capaz de
robar, de asesinar..., de todo.

SIRENA. Ya sé que siempre sabríais rehacer vuestra fortuna. Pero la
fiesta se anima. Ven conmigo, Silvia. Para danzar téngote destinado un
caballero, que habéis[68.1] de ser la más lucida pareja... (_Se dirigen
todos a la primera derecha. Al ir a salir el señor Polichinela, Crispín,
que entra por la segunda derecha, le detiene._)


ESCENA VII

CRISPÍN y POLICHINELA


CRISPÍN. ¡Señor Polichinela! Con licencia.

POLICHINELA. ¿Quién me llama? ¿Qué me queréis?

CRISPÍN. ¿No recordáis de mí? No es extraño. El tiempo todo lo borra, y
cuando es algo enojoso lo borrado, no deja ni siquiera el borrón como
recuerdo, sino que se apresura a pintar sobre él con alegres colores,
esos alegres colores con que ocultáis al mundo vuestras jorobas.[68.2]
Señor Polichinela, cuando yo os conocí, apenas las cubrían unos
descoloridos andrajos.

POLICHINELA. ¿Y quién eres tú y dónde pudiste conocerme?

CRISPÍN. Yo era un mozuelo, tú eras ya todo un hombre. Pero ¿has
olvidado ya tantas gloriosas hazañas por esos mares,[68.3] tantas
victorias ganadas al turco, a que no poco contribuimos con nuestro
heroico esfuerzo, unidos los dos al mismo noble remo en la misma
gloriosa nave?

POLICHINELA. ¡Imprudente! ¡Calla o...!

CRISPÍN. O harás conmigo como con tu primer amo en Nápoles y con tu
primera mujer en Bolonia, y con aquel mercader judío en Venecia...

POLICHINELA. ¡Calla! ¿Quién eres tú, que tanto sabes y tanto hablas?

CRISPÍN. Soy... lo que fuiste. Y quien llegará a ser lo que eres...,
como tú llegaste. No con tanta violencia como tú, porque los tiempos son
otros y ya sólo asesinan los locos y los enamorados y cuatro pobretes
que aun asaltan a mano armada al transeúnte por calles obscuras o
caminos solitarios. ¡Carne de horca, despreciable!

POLICHINELA. ¿Y qué quieres de mí? Dinero, ¿no es eso? Ya nos veremos
más despacio. No es éste el lugar...

CRISPÍN. No tiembles por tu dinero. Sólo deseo ser tu amigo, tu aliado,
como en aquellos tiempos.

POLICHINELA. ¿Qué puedo hacer por ti?

CRISPÍN. No, ahora soy yo quien va a servirte, quien quiere obligarte
con una advertencia... (_Haciéndole que mire[69.1] a la primera
derecha._) ¿Ves allí a tu hija cómo danza con un joven caballero y cómo
sonríe ruborosa al oír sus galanterías? Ese caballero es mi amo.

POLICHINELA. ¿Tu amo? Será entonces un aventurero, un hombre de fortuna,
un bandido como...

CRISPÍN. ¿Como nosotros... vas a decir? No; es más peligroso que
nosotros, porque, como ves, su figura es bella, y hay en su mirada un
misterio de encanto y en su voz una dulzura que llega al corazón y le
conmueve como si contara una historia triste. ¿No es esto bastante para
enamorar a cualquier mujer? No dirás que no te he advertido. Corre y
separa a tu hija de ese hombre, y no la permitas que baile con él ni que
vuelva a escucharle en su vida.

POLICHINELA. ¿Y dices que es tu amo y así le sirves?

CRISPÍN. ¿Lo extrañas? ¿Te olvidas ya de cuando fuiste criado? Yo aun no
pienso asesinarle.

POLICHINELA. Dices bien; un amo es siempre odioso. Y en servirme a mí,
¿qué interés es el tuyo?

CRISPÍN. Llegar a buen puerto, como llegamos tantas veces remando
juntos. Entonces tú me decías alguna vez: Tú que eres fuerte rema por
mí... En esta galera de ahora eres tú más fuerte que yo; rema por mí,
por el fiel amigo de entonces, que la vida es muy pesada galera y yo
llevo remado[70.1] mucho. (_Vase por la segunda derecha._)


ESCENA VIII

EL SEÑOR POLICHINELA, DOÑA SIRENA, la SEÑORA de POLICHINELA, RISELA y
LAURA, que salen por la primera derecha.


LAURA. Sólo doña Sirena sabe ofrecer fiestas semejantes.

RISELA. Y la de esta noche excedió a todas.

SIRENA. La presencia de tan singular caballero fue un nuevo atractivo.

POLICHINELA. ¿Y Silvia? ¿Dónde quedó Silvia? ¿Cómo dejaste a nuestra
hija?

SIRENA. Callad, señor Polichinela, que vuestra hija se halla en
excelente compañía, y en mi casa siempre estará segura.

RISELA. No hubo atenciones más que para ella.

LAURA. Para ella es todo el agrado.

RISELA. Y todos los suspiros.

POLICHINELA. ¿De quién? ¿De ese caballero misterioso? Pues no me
contenta. Y ahora mismo...

SIRENA. ¡Pero señor Polichinela...!

POLICHINELA. ¡Dejadme, dejadme! Yo sé lo que me hago.[71.1] (_Vase por
la primera derecha._)

SIRENA. ¿Qué le ocurre? ¿Qué destemplanza es ésta?

SEÑORA DE POLICHINELA. ¿Veis qué hombre? ¡Capaz será de una grosería con
el caballero! ¡Que ha de casar a su hija con algún mercader u hombre de
baja estofa! ¡Que ha de hacerla desgraciada para toda la vida!

SIRENA. ¡Eso no!..., que sois su madre, y algo ha de valer vuestra
autoridad...

SEÑORA DE POLICHINELA. ¡Ved! Sin duda dijo alguna impertinencia, y el
caballero ya deja la mano de Silvia, y se retira cabizbajo.

LAURA. Y el señor Polichinela parece reprender a vuestra hija...

SIRENA. ¡Vamos, vamos! Que no puede consentirse tanta tiranía.

RISELA. Ahora vemos, señora Polichinela, que con todas vuestras riquezas
no sois menos desgraciada.

SEÑORA DE POLICHINELA. No lo sabéis, que algunas veces llegó hasta
golpearme.

LAURA. ¿Qué decís? ¿Y fuisteis mujer para consentirlo?

SEÑORA DE POLICHINELA. Luego cree componerlo con traerme algún regalo.

SIRENA. ¡Menos mal! Que hay maridos que no lo componen con nada. (_Vanse
todas por la primera derecha._)


ESCENA IX

LEANDRO y CRISPÍN, que salen por la segunda derecha.


CRISPÍN. ¿Qué tristeza, qué abatimiento es ése? ¡Con mayor alegría pensé
hallarte!

LEANDRO. Hasta ahora no me vi perdido; hasta ahora no me importó menos
perderme.[72.1] Huyamos, Crispín; huyamos de esta ciudad antes de que
nadie pueda descubrirnos y vengan a saber lo que somos.

CRISPÍN. Si huyéramos, es cuando todos lo sabrían y cuando muchos
corrieran hasta detenernos y hacernos volver a nuestro pesar, que no
parece bien ausentarnos con tanta descortesía, sin despedirnos de gente
tan atenta.

LEANDRO. No te burles, Crispín, que estoy desesperado.

CRISPÍN. ¡Así eres! Cuando nuestras esperanzas llevan mejor camino.

LEANDRO. ¿Qué puedo esperar? Quisiste que fingiera un amor, y mal sabré
fingirlo.

CRISPÍN. ¿Por qué?

LEANDRO. Porque amo, amo con toda verdad y con toda mi alma.

CRISPÍN. ¿A Silvia? ¿Y de eso te lamentas?

LEANDRO. ¡Nunca pensé que pudiera amarse de este modo! ¡Nunca pensé que
yo pudiera amar! En mi vida errante por todos los caminos, no fui
siquiera el que siempre pasa, sino el que siempre huye, enemiga la
tierra, enemigos los hombres, enemiga la luz del sol. La fruta del
camino, hurtada, no ofrecida, dejó acaso en mis labios algún sabor de
amores, y alguna vez, después de muchos días azarosos, en el descanso de
una noche, la serenidad del cielo me hizo soñar con algo que fuera[72.2]
en mi vida como aquel cielo de la noche que traía a mi alma el reposo
de su serenidad. Y así esta noche en el encanto de la fiesta... me
pareció que era un descanso en mi vida... y soñaba... ¡He soñado! Pero
mañana será otra vez la huida azarosa, será la Justicia que nos
persigue... y no quiero que me halle aquí, donde está ella, donde ella
pueda avergonzarse de haberme visto.

CRISPÍN. Yo creí ver que eras acogido con agrado... Y no fui yo solo en
advertirlo. Doña Sirena y nuestros buenos amigos el Capitán y el Poeta
le hicieron de ti los mayores elogios. A su excelente madre, la señora
Polichinela, que sólo sueña emparentar con un noble, le pareciste el
yerno de sus ilusiones. En cuanto al señor Polichinela...

LEANDRO. Sospecha de nosotros..., nos conoce...

CRISPÍN. Sí; al señor Polichinela no es fácil engañarle como a un hombre
vulgar. A un zorro viejo como él hay que engañarle con lealtad. Por eso
me pareció el mejor medio prevenirle de todo.

LEANDRO. ¿Cómo?

CRISPÍN. Sí; él me conoce de antiguo... Al decirle que tú eres mi amo
supuso, con razón, que el amo sería digno del criado. Y yo, por
corresponder a su confianza, le advertí que de ningún modo consintiera
que hablaras con su hija.

LEANDRO. ¿Eso hiciste? ¿Y qué puedo esperar?

CRISPÍN. ¡Necio eres! Que el señor Polichinela ponga todo su empeño en
que no vuelvas a ver a su hija.

LEANDRO. ¡No lo entiendo!

CRISPÍN. Y que de este modo sea nuestro mejor aliado, porque bastará que
él se oponga, para que su mujer le lleve la contraria y su hija se
enamore de ti más locamente. Tú no sabes lo que es una joven, hija de
un padre rico, criada en el mayor regalo, cuando ve por primera vez en
su vida que algo se opone a su voluntad. Estoy seguro de que esta misma
noche, antes de terminar la fiesta, consigue burlar la vigilancia de su
padre para hablar todavía contigo.

LEANDRO. ¿Pero no ves que nada me importa del señor Polichinela ni del
mundo entero? Que es a ella, sólo a ella, a quien yo no quiero parecer
indigno y despreciable..., a quien yo no quiero mentir.

CRISPÍN. ¡Bah! ¡Deja locuras! No es posible retroceder. Piensa en la
suerte que nos espera si vacilamos en seguir adelante. ¿Que te has
enamorado? Ese amor verdadero nos servirá mejor que si fuera fingido.
Tal vez de otro modo hubieras querido ir demasiado de prisa; y si la
osadía y la insolencia convienen para todo, sólo en amor sienta bien a
los hombres algo de timidez. La timidez del hombre hace ser más
atrevidas a las mujeres. Y si lo dudas, aquí tienes a la inocente
Silvia, que llega con el mayor sigilo y sólo espera para acercarse a ti
que[74.1] yo me retire o me esconda.

LEANDRO. ¿Silvia dices?

CRISPÍN. ¡Chito! ¡Que pudiera espantarse! Y cuando esté a tu lado, mucha
discreción..., pocas palabras, pocas... Adora, contempla, admira, y deja
que hable por ti el encanto de esta noche azul, propicia a los amores, y
esa música que apaga sus sones entre la arboleda y llega como triste de
la alegría de la fiesta.

LEANDRO. No te burles, Crispín; no te burles de este amor que será mi
muerte.

CRISPÍN. ¿Por qué he de burlarme? Yo sé bien que no conviene siempre
rastrear. Alguna vez hay que volar por el cielo para mejor dominar la
tierra. Vuela tú ahora; yo sigo[75.1] arrastrándome. ¡El mundo será
nuestro! (_Vase por la segunda izquierda._)


ESCENA ÚLTIMA

LEANDRO y SILVIA, que sale por la primera derecha. Al final, CRISPÍN


LEANDRO. ¡Silvia!

SILVIA. ¿Sois vos? Perdonad; no creí hallaros aquí.

LEANDRO. Huí de la fiesta. Su alegría me entristece.

SILVIA. ¿También a vos?

LEANDRO. ¿También decís? ¡También os entristece la alegría!...

SILVIA. Mi padre se ha enojado conmigo. ¡Nunca me habló de ese modo! Y
con vos también estuvo desatento. ¿Le perdonáis?

LEANDRO. Sí; lo perdono todo. Pero no le enojéis por mi causa. Volved a
la fiesta, que han de buscaros; y si os hallaran aquí a mi lado...

SILVIA. Tenéis razón. Pero volved vos también. ¿Por qué habéis de estar
triste?

LEANDRO. No; yo saldré sin que nadie lo advierta... Debo ir muy lejos.

SILVIA. ¿Qué decís? ¿No os trajeron asuntos de importancia a esta
ciudad? ¿No debíais permanecer aquí mucho tiempo?

LEANDRO. ¡No, no! ¡Ni un día más! ¡Ni un día más!

SILVIA. Entonces... ¿Me habéis mentido?

LEANDOR. ¡Mentir! No... No digáis que he mentido... No; ésta es la única
verdad de mi vida... ¡Este sueño que no debe tener despertar! (_Se oye
a lo lejos la música de una canción hasta que cae el telón._)

SILVIA. Es Arlequín que canta... ¿Qué os sucede? ¿Lloráis? ¿Es la música
la que os hace llorar? ¿Por qué no decirme[76.1] vuestra tristeza?

LEANDRO. ¿Mi tristeza? Ya la dice esa canción. Escuchadla.

SILVIA. Desde aquí sólo la música se percibe; las palabras se pierden.
¿No la sabéis? Es una canción al silencio de la noche, y se llama _El
reino de las almas_. ¿No la sabéis?

LEANDRO. Decidla.

SILVIA.

    La noche amorosa, sobre los amantes
    tiende de su cielo el dosel nupcial.
    La noche ha prendido sus claros diamantes
    en el terciopelo de un cielo estival.
    El jardín en sombra no tiene colores,
    y es en el misterio de su obscuridad
    susurro el follaje, aroma las flores
    y amor... un deseo dulce de llorar.
    La voz que suspira, y la voz que canta
    y la voz que dice palabras de amor,
    impiedad parecen en la noche santa
    como una blasfemia entre una oración.
    ¡Alma del silencio, que yo reverencio,
    tiene tu silencio la inefable voz
    de los que murieron amando en silencio;
    de los que callaron muriendo de amor;
    de los que en la vida por amarnos mucho
    tal vez no supieron su amor expresar!
    ¿No es la voz acaso que en la noche escucho
    y cuando amor dice, dice eternidad?
    ¡Madre de mi alma! ¿No es luz de tus ojos
            la luz de esa estrella
    que como una lágrima de amor infinito
            en la noche tiembla?
    ¡Dile a la que hoy amo que yo no amé nunca
            más que a ti en la tierra,
    y desde que has muerto sólo me ha besado
            la luz de esa estrella!

LEANDRO.

    ¡Madre de mi alma! Yo no he amado nunca
            más que a ti en la tierra,
    y desde que has muerto sólo me ha besado
            la luz de esa estrella.

(_Quedan en silencio, abrazados y mirándose._)

CRISPÍN. (_Que aparece por la segunda izquierda. Aparte._)

        ¡Noche, poesía, locuras de amante!...
    ¡Todo ha de servirnos en esta ocasión!
    ¡El triunfo es seguro! ¡Valor y adelante!
    ¿Quién podrá vencernos si es nuestro el amor?

(_Silvia y Leandro, abrazados, se dirigen muy despacio a la primera
derecha. Crispín los sigue sin ser visto por ellos. El telón va bajando
muy despacio._)




ACTO SEGUNDO

CUADRO TERCERO

Sala en casa de Leandro


ESCENA PRIMERA

CRISPÍN, el CAPITÁN, ARLEQUÍN. Salen por la segunda derecha, o sea el
pasillo.


CRISPÍN. Entrad, caballeros, y sentaos con toda comodidad. Diré que os
sirvan algo... ¡Hola! ¡Eh! ¡Hola!

CAPITÁN. De ningún modo. No aceptamos nada.

ARLEQUÍN. Sólo venimos a ofrecernos a tu señor, después de lo que hemos
sabido.

CAPITÁN. ¡Increíble traición, que no quedará sin castigar! ¡Yo te
aseguro que si el señor Polichinela se pone al alcance de mi mano...!

ARLEQUÍN. ¡Ventaja de los poetas! Yo siempre le tendré al alcance de mis
versos... ¡Oh! La tremenda sátira que pienso dedicarle... ¡Viejo dañino,
viejo malvado!

CAPITÁN. ¿Y dices que tu amo no fue siquiera herido?

CRISPÍN. Pero pudo ser muerto. ¡Figuraos! ¡Una docena de espadachines
asaltándole de improviso! Gracias a su valor, a su destreza, a mis
voces...

ARLEQUÍN. ¿Y ello sucedió anoche, cuando tu señor hablaba con Silvia por
la tapia de su jardín?

CRISPÍN. Ya mi señor había tenido aviso...; pero ya le conocéis: no es
hombre para intimidarse por nada.

CAPITÁN. Pero debió advertirnos...

ARLEQUÍN. Debió advertir al señor Capitán. Él le hubiera acompañado
gustoso.

CRISPÍN. Ya conocéis a mi señor. Él solo se basta.

CAPITÁN. ¿Y dices que por fin conseguiste atrapar por el cuello a uno de
los malandrines, que confesó que todo estaba preparado por el señor
Polichinela para deshacerse de tu amo?...

CRISPÍN. ¿Y quién sino él podía tener interés en ello? Su hija ama a mi
señor; él trata de casarla a su gusto; mi señor estorba sus planes, y el
señor Polichinela supo toda su vida cómo suprimir estorbos. ¿No enviudó
dos veces en poco tiempo? ¿No heredó en menos a todos sus parientes,
viejos y jóvenes? Todos lo saben, nadie dirá que le calumnio... ¡Ah! La
riqueza del señor Polichinela es un insulto a la humanidad y a la
justicia. Sólo entre gente sin honor puede triunfar impune un hombre
como el señor Polichinela.

ARLEQUÍN. Dices bien. Y yo en mi sátira he de decir todo eso... Claro
que sin nombrarle, porque la poesía no debe permitirse tanta licencia.

CRISPÍN. ¡Bastante le importará a él de vuestra sátira!

CAPITÁN. Dejadme, dejadme a mí, que como[79.1] él se ponga al alcance de
mi mano... Pero bien sé que él no vendrá a buscarme.

CRISPÍN. Ni mi señor consentiría que se ofendiera al señor Polichinela.
A pesar de todo, es el padre de Silvia. Lo que importa es que todos
sepan en la ciudad cómo mi amo estuvo a punto de ser asesinado; cómo no
puede consentirse que ese viejo zorro contraríe la voluntad y el corazón
de su hija.

ARLEQUÍN. No puede consentirse; el amor está sobre todo.

CRISPÍN. Y si mi amo fuera algún ruin sujeto... Pero, decidme: ¿no es el
señor Polichinela el que debía enorgullecerse de que mi señor se haya
dignado enamorarse de su hija y aceptarle por suegro? ¡Mi señor, que a
tantas doncellas de linaje excelso ha despreciado, y por quien más de
cuatro princesas hicieron cuatro mil locuras!... Pero ¿quién llega?
(_Mirando hacia la segunda derecha._) ¡Ah, Colombina! ¡Adelante,
graciosa Colombina, no hayas[80.1] temor! (_Sale Colombina._) Todos
somos amigos, y nuestra mutua amistad te defiende de nuestra unánime
admiración.


ESCENA II

DICHOS y COLOMBINA, que sale por la segunda derecha, o sea el
pasillo.


COLOMBINA. Doña Sirena me envía a saber de tu señor. Apenas rayaba el
día, vino Silvia a nuestra casa, y refirió a mi señora todo lo sucedido.
Dice que no volverá a casa de su padre, ni saldrá de casa de mi señora
más que para ser la esposa del señor Leandro.

CRISPÍN. ¿Eso dice? ¡Oh, noble joven! ¡Oh, corazón amante!

ARLEQUÍN. ¡Qué epitalamio pienso componer a sus bodas!

COLOMBINA. Silvia cree que Leandro está malherido... Desde su balcón oyó
ruido de espadas, tus voces en demanda de auxilio. Después cayó sin
sentido, y así la hallaron al amanecer. Decidme lo que sea[80.2] del
señor Leandro, pues muere de angustia hasta saberlo, y mi señora también
quedó en cuidado.

CRISPÍN. Dile que mi señor pudo salvarse, porque amor le guardaba; dile
que sólo de amor muere con incurable herida... Dile... (_Viendo venir a
Leandro._) ¡Ah! Pero aquí llega él mismo, que te dirá cuanto yo pudiera
decirte.


ESCENA III

DICHOS y LEANDRO, que sale por la primera derecha.


CAPITÁN. (_Abrazándole._) ¡Amigo mío!

ARLEQUÍN. (_Abrazándole._) ¡Amigo y señor!

COLOMBINA. ¡Ah, señor Leandro! ¡Que estáis salvo! ¡Qué alegría!

LEANDRO. ¿Cómo supisteis?

COLOMBINA. En toda la ciudad no se habla de otra cosa; por las calles se
reúne la gente en corrillos, y todos murmuran y claman contra el señor
Polichinela.

LEANDRO. ¿Qué decís?

CAPITÁN. ¡Y si algo volviera a intentar contra vos...!

ARLEQUÍN. ¿Y si aún quisiera oponerse a vuestros amores?

COLOMBINA. Todo sería inútil. Silvia está en casa de mi señora, y sólo
saldrá de allí para ser vuestra esposa...

LEANDRO. ¿Silvia en vuestra casa? Y su padre...

COLOMBINA. El señor Polichinela hará muy bien en ocultarse.

CAPITÁN. ¡Creyó que a tanto podría atreverse con su riqueza insolente!

ARLEQUÍN. Pudo atreverse a todo, pero no al amor...

COLOMBINA. ¡Pretender asesinaros tan villanamente!

CRISPÍN. ¡Doce espadachines, doce..., yo los conté!

LEANDRO. Yo sólo pude distinguir a tres o cuatro.

CRISPÍN. Mi señor concluirá por deciros que no fue tanto el riesgo, por
no hacer mérito de su serenidad y de su valor... ¡Pero yo lo vi! Doce
eran, doce, armados hasta los dientes, decididos a todo. ¡Imposible me
parece que escapara con vida!

COLOMBINA. Corro a tranquilizar a Silvia y a mi señora.

CRISPÍN. Escucha, Colombina. A Silvia, ¿no fuera mejor no
tranquilizarla?...

COLOMBINA. Déjalo a cargo de mi señora. Silvia cree a estas horas que tu
señor está moribundo, y aunque doña Sirena finge contenerla..., no
tardará en venir aquí sin reparar en nada.

CRISPÍN. Mucho fuera que tu señora no hubiera pensado en todo.

CAPITÁN. Vamos también, pues ya en nada podemos aquí serviros. Lo que
ahora conviene es sostener la indignación de las gentes contra el señor
Polichinela.

ARLEQUÍN. Apedrearemos su casa... Levantaremos a toda la ciudad en
contra suya... Sepa que si hasta hoy nadie se atrevió contra él, hoy
todos juntos nos atrevemos; sepa que hay un espíritu y una conciencia en
la multitud.

COLOMBINA. Él mismo tendrá que venir a rogaros que toméis a su hija por
esposa.

CRISPÍN. Sí, sí; corred, amigos. Ved que la vida de mi señor no está
segura... El que una vez quiso asesinarle, no se detendrá por nada.

CAPITÁN. No temas... ¡Amigo mío!

ARLEQUÍN. ¡Amigo y señor!

COLOMBINA. ¡Señor Leandro!

LEANDRO. Gracias a todos, amigos míos, amigos leales. (_Se van todos,
menos Leandro y Crispín, por la segunda derecha._)


ESCENA IV

LEANDRO y CRISPÍN


LEANDRO. ¿Qué es esto, Crispín? ¿Qué pretendes? ¿Hasta dónde has de
llevarme con tus enredos? ¿Piensas que lo creí? Tú pagaste a los
espadachines; todo fue invención tuya. ¡Mal hubiera podido valerme
contra todos si ellos no vinieran de burla!

CRISPÍN. ¿Y serás capaz de reñirme, cuando así anticipo el logro de tus
esperanzas?

LEANDRO. No, Crispín, no. ¡Bien sabes que no! Amo a Silvia y no lograré
su amor con engaños, suceda lo que suceda.

CRISPÍN. Bien sabes lo que ha de sucederte... ¡Si amar es resignarse a
perder lo que se ama por sutilezas de conciencia... que Silvia misma no
ha de agradecerte!...

LEANDRO. ¿Qué dices? ¡Si ella supiera quién soy!

CRISPÍN. Y cuando lo sepa, ya no serás el que fuiste: serás su esposo,
su enamorado esposo, todo lo enamorado y lo fiel y lo noble que tú
quieras y ella pueda desear[83.1]... Una vez dueño de su amor... y de su
dote, ¿no serás el más perfecto caballero? Tú no eres como el señor
Polichinela, que con todo su dinero que tantos lujos le permite, aun no
se ha permitido el lujo de ser honrado... En él es naturaleza la
truhanería; pero en ti, en ti fue sólo necesidad... Y aun si no me
hubieras tenido a tu lado, ya te hubieras dejado morir de hambre de puro
escrupuloso. ¡Ah! ¿Crees que si yo hubiera hallado en ti otro hombre me
hubiera contentado con dedicarte a enamorar?... No; te hubiera dedicado
a la política, y, no el dinero del señor Polichinela, el mundo hubiera
sido nuestro... Pero no eres ambicioso, te contentas con ser feliz...

LEANDRO. ¿Pero no viste que mal podía serlo? Si hubiera mentido para ser
amado y ser rico de este modo, hubiera sido porque yo no amaba, y mal
podía ser feliz. Y si amo, ¿cómo puedo mentir?

CRISPÍN. Pues no mientas. Ama, ama con todo tu corazón, inmensamente.
Pero defiende tu amor sobre todo. En amor no es mentir callar lo que
puede hacernos perder la estimación del ser amado.

LEANDRO. Ésas sí que son sutilezas, Crispín.

CRISPÍN. Que tú debiste hallar antes si tu amor fuera como dices. Amor
es todo sutilezas y la mayor de todas no es engañar a los demás, sino
engañarse a sí mismo.

LEANDRO. Yo no puedo engañarme, Crispín. No soy de esos hombres que
cuando venden su conciencia se creen en el caso de vender también su
entendimiento.

CRISPÍN. Por eso dije que no servías para la política. Y bien dices. Que
el entendimiento es la conciencia de la verdad, y el que llega a
perderla entre las mentiras de su vida, es como si se perdiera a sí
propio, porque ya nunca volverá a encontrarse ni a conocerse, y él mismo
vendrá a ser otra mentira.

LEANDRO. ¿Dónde aprendiste tanto, Crispín?

CRISPÍN. Medité algún tiempo en galeras, donde esta conciencia de mi
entendimiento me acusó más de torpe[84.1] que de pícaro. Con más
picardía y menos torpeza, en vez de remar en ellas pude haber llegado a
mandarlas. Por eso juré no volver en mi vida. Piensa de qué no seré
capaz ahora que por tu causa me veo a punto de quebrantar mi juramento.

LEANDRO. ¿Qué dices?

CRISPÍN. Que nuestra situación es ya insostenible, que hemos apurado
nuestro crédito, y las gentes ya empiezan a pedir algo efectivo. El
Hostelero, que nos albergó con toda esplendidez por muchos días,
esperando que recibieras tus libranzas. El señor Pantalón, que fiado en
el crédito del Hostelero, nos proporcionó cuanto fue preciso para
instalarnos con suntuosidad en esta casa... Mercaderes de todo género,
que no dudaron en proveernos de todo, deslumbrados por tanta grandeza.
Doña Sirena misma, que tan buenos oficios nos ha prestado en tus
amores... Todos han esperado lo razonable, y sería injusto pretender más
de ellos, ni quejarse de tan amable gente... ¡Con letras de oro quedará
grabado en mi corazón el nombre de esta insigne ciudad, que desde ahora
declaro por mi madre adoptiva! A más de esto..., ¿olvidas que de otras
partes habrán salido y andarán en busca nuestra? ¿Piensas que las
hazañas de Mantua y de Florencia son para olvidarlas?[85.1] ¿Recuerdas
el famoso proceso de Bolonia?[85.2]... ¡Tres mil doscientos folios
sumaba cuando nos ausentamos alarmados de verle crecer tan sin tino!
¿Qué no habrá aumentado bajo la pluma de aquel gran doctor jurista que
la había tomado por su cuenta? ¡Qué de considerandos y de
resultandos[85.3] de que no resultará cosa buena! ¿Y aun dudas? ¿Y aun
me reprendes porque di la batalla que puede decidir en un día de nuestra
suerte?

LEANDRO. ¡Huyamos!

CRISPÍN. ¡No! ¡Basta de huir a la desesperada! Hoy ha de fijarse nuestra
fortuna... Te di el amor, dame tú la vida.

LEANDRO. ¿Pero cómo salvarnos? ¿Qué puedo yo hacer? Dime.

CRISPÍN. Nada ya. Basta con aceptar lo que los demás han de
ofrecernos... Piensa que hemos creado muchos intereses y es interés de
todos el salvarnos.


ESCENA V

DICHOS y DOÑA SIRENA, que sale por la segunda derecha, o sea el
pasillo.


SIRENA. ¿Dais licencia, señor Leandro?

LEANDRO. ¡Doña Sirena! ¿Vos en mi casa?

SIRENA. Ya veis a lo que me expongo. A tantas lenguas maldicientes. ¡Yo
en casa de un caballero, joven, apuesto!...

CRISPÍN. Mi señor sabría hacer callar a los maldicientes si alguno se
atreviera a poner sospecha en vuestra fama.

SIRENA. ¿Tu señor? No me fío. ¡Los hombres son tan jactanciosos! Pero en
nada reparo por serviros. ¿Qué me decís, señor, que anoche quisieron
daros muerte? No se habla de otra cosa... ¡Y Silvia! ¡Pobre niña!
¡Cuánto os ama! ¡Quisiera saber qué hicisteis para enamorarla de ese
modo!

CRISPÍN. Mi señor sabe que todo lo debe a vuestra amistad.

SIRENA. No diré yo que no me deba mucho..., que siempre hablé de él como
yo no debía, sin conocerle lo bastante... A mucho me atreví por amor
vuestro. Si ahora faltarais a vuestras promesas...

CRISPÍN. ¿Dudáis de mi señor? ¿No tenéis cédula firmada de su mano?...

SIRENA. ¡Buena mano y buen nombre! ¿Pensáis que todos no nos conocemos?
Yo sé confiar y sé que el señor Leandro cumplirá como debe. Pero si
vierais que hoy es un día aciago para mí, y por lograr hoy una mitad de
lo que se me ha ofrecido perdería gustosa la otra mitad...

CRISPÍN. ¿Hoy decís?

SIRENA. ¡Día de tribulaciones! Para que nada falte, veinte años hace hoy
también que perdí a mi segundo marido, que fue el primero, el único amor
de mi vida.

CRISPÍN. Dicho sea en elogio del primero.

SIRENA. El primero me fue impuesto por mi padre. Yo no le amaba, y a
pesar de ello supe serle fiel.

CRISPÍN. ¿Qué no sabréis vos, doña Sirena?

SIRENA. Pero dejemos los recuerdos, que todo lo entristecen. Hablemos de
esperanzas. ¿Sabéis que Silvia quiso venir conmigo?

LEANDRO. ¿Aquí, a esta casa?

SIRENA. ¿Qué os parece? ¿Qué diría el señor Polichinela? ¡Con toda la
ciudad soliviantada contra él, fuerza le sería casaros!

LEANDRO. No, no; impedidla que venga.

CRISPÍN. ¡Chits! Comprenderéis que mi señor no dice lo que siente.

SIRENA. Lo comprendo... ¿Qué no daría él por ver a Silvia a su lado,
para no separarse nunca de ella?

CRISPÍN. ¿Qué daría? ¡No lo sabéis!

SIRENA. Por eso lo pregunto.

CRISPÍN. ¡Ah, doña Sirena!... Si mi señor es hoy esposo de Silvia, hoy
mismo cumplirá lo que os prometió.

SIRENA. ¿Y si no lo fuera?

CRISPÍN. Entonces... lo habréis perdido todo. Ved lo que os conviene.

LEANDRO. ¡Calla, Crispín! ¡Basta! No puedo consentir que mi amor se
trate como mercancía. Salid, doña Sirena; decid a Silvia que vuelva a
casa de su padre, que no venga aquí en modo alguno, que me olvide para
siempre, que yo he de huir donde no vuelva a saber de mi nombre... ¡Mi
nombre! ¿Tengo yo nombre acaso?

CRISPÍN. ¿No callarás?

SIRENA. ¿Qué le dio? ¡Qué locura es ésta! ¡Volved en vos! ¡Renunciar de
ese modo a tan gran ventura!... Y no se trata sólo de vos. Pensad que
hay quien todo lo fió en vuestra suerte, y no puede burlarse así de una
dama de calidad que a tanto se expuso por serviros. Vos no haréis tal
locura; vos os casaréis con Silvia, o habrá quien sepa pediros cuenta de
vuestros engaños, que no estoy tan sola en el mundo como pudiste creer,
señor Leandro.

CRISPÍN. Doña Sirena dice muy bien. Pero creed que mi señor sólo habla
así ofendido por vuestra desconfianza.

SIRENA. No es desconfianza en él... Es, todo he de decirlo..., es que el
señor Polichinela no es hombre para dejarse burlar..., y ante el clamor
que habéis levantado contra él con vuestra estratagema de anoche...

CRISPÍN. ¿Estratagema decís?

SIRENA. ¡Bah! Todos nos conocemos. Sabed que uno de los espadachines es
pariente mío, y los otros me son también muy allegados... Pues bien: el
señor Polichinela no se ha descuidado, y ya se murmura por la ciudad que
ha dado aviso a la Justicia de quién sois y cómo puede perderos; dícese
también que hoy llegó de Bolonia un proceso...

CRISPÍN. ¡Y un endiablado doctor con él! Tres mil novecientos folios...

SIRENA. Todo esto se dice, se asegura. Ved si importa no perder tiempo.

CRISPÍN. ¿Y quién lo malgasta y lo pierde sino vos? Volved a vuestra
casa... Decid a Silvia...

SIRENA. Silvia está aquí. Vino junto con Colombina, como otra doncella
de mi acompañamiento. En vuestra antecámara espera. Le dije que estabais
muy malherido...

LEANDRO. ¡Oh, Silvia mía!

SIRENA. Sólo pensó en que podíais morir...; nada pensó en lo que
arriesgaba con venir a veros. ¿Soy vuestra amiga?

CRISPÍN. Sois adorable. Pronto. Acostaos aquí, haceos del doliente[89.1]
y del desmayado. Ved que si es preciso yo sabré[89.2] que lo estéis de
veras. (_Amenazándole y haciéndole sentar en un sillón._)

LEANDRO. Sí, soy vuestro, lo sé, lo veo... Pero Silvia no lo será. Sí,
quiero verla; decidle que llegue, que he de salvarla a pesar vuestro, a
pesar de todos, a pesar de ella misma.

CRISPÍN. Comprenderéis que mi señor no siente lo que dice.

SIRENA. No lo creo tan necio ni tan loco. Ven conmigo. (_Se va con
Crispín por la segunda derecha, o sea el pasillo._)


ESCENA VI

LEANDRO y SILVIA, que sale por la segunda derecha.


LEANDRO. ¡Silvia! ¡Silvia mía!

SILVIA. ¿No estás herido?

LEANDRO. No; ya lo ves... Fue un engaño, un engaño más para traerte
aquí. Pero no temas; pronto vendrá tu padre, pronto saldrás con él sin
que nada tengas que reprocharme... ¡Oh! Sólo el haber empañado la
serenidad de tu alma con una ilusión de amor, que para ti sólo será el
recuerdo de un mal sueño.

SILVIA. ¿Qué dices, Leandro? ¿Tu amor no era verdad?

LEANDRO. ¡Mi amor, sí...; por eso no ha de engañarte! Sal de aquí
pronto, antes de que nadie, fuera de los que aquí te trajeron, pueda
saber que viniste.

SILVIA. ¿Qué temes? ¿No estoy segura en tu casa? Yo no dudé en venir a
ella... ¿Qué peligros pueden amenazarme a tu lado?

LEANDRO. Ninguno; dices bien. Mi amor te defiende de tu misma inocencia.

SILVIA. No he de volver a casa de mi padre después de su acción
horrible.

LEANDRO. No, Silvia, no culpes a tu padre. No fue él; fue otro engaño
más, otra mentira... Huye de mí, olvida a este miserable aventurero, sin
nombre, perseguido por la Justicia.

SILVIA. ¡No, no es cierto! Es que la conducta de mi padre me hizo
indigna de vuestro cariño. Eso es. Lo comprendo... ¡Pobre de mí!

LEANDRO. ¡Silvia! ¡Silvia mía! ¡Qué crueles tus dulces palabras! ¡Qué
cruel esa noble confianza de tu corazón, ignorante del mal y de la vida!


ESCENA VII

DICHOS y CRISPÍN, que sale corriendo por la segunda derecha.


CRISPÍN. ¡Señor! ¡Señor! El señor Polichinela llega.

SILVIA. ¡Mi padre!

LEANDRO. ¡Nada importa! Yo os entregaré a él por mi mano.

CRISPÍN. Ved que no viene solo, sino con mucha gente y justicia con él.

LEANDRO. ¡Ah! ¡Si te hallan aquí! ¡En mi poder! Sin duda tú les diste
aviso... Pero no lograréis vuestro propósito.

CRISPÍN. ¿Yo? No por cierto... Que esto va de veras, y ya temo que nadie
pueda salvarnos.

LEANDRO. ¡A nosotros, no; ni he de intentarlo!... Pero a ella, sí.
Conviene ocultarte; queda aquí.

SILVIA. ¿Y tú?

LEANDRO. Nada temas. ¡Pronto, que llegan! (_Esconde a Silvia en la
habitación del foro, diciéndole a Crispín_): Tú verás lo que trae a esa
gente. Sólo cuida de que nadie entre ahí hasta mi regreso... No hay otra
huida. (_Se dirige a la ventana._)

CRISPÍN. (_Deteniéndole._) ¡Señor! ¡Tente! ¡No te mates así!

LEANDRO. No pretendo matarme ni pretendo escapar; pretendo salvarla.
(_Trepa hacia arriba por la ventana y desaparece._)

CRISPÍN. ¡Señor, señor! ¡Menos mal! Creí que intentaba arrojarse al
suelo, pero trepó hacia arriba... Esperemos todavía... Aun quiere
volar... Es su región, las alturas. Yo a la mía, la tierra... Ahora más
que nunca conviene afirmarse en ella. (_Se sienta en un sillón con mucha
calma._)


ESCENA VIII

CRISPÍN, el SEÑOR POLICHINELA, el HOSTELERO, el SEÑOR PANTALÓN, el
CAPITÁN, ARLEQUÍN, el DOCTOR, el SECRETARIO y dos ALGUACILES con
enormes protocolos de curia. Todos salen por la segunda derecha, o
sea el pasillo.


POLICHINELA. (_Dentro, a gente que se supone fuera._) ¡Guardad bien las
puertas, que nadie salga, hombre ni mujer, ni perro ni gato!

HOSTELERO. ¿Dónde están, dónde están esos bandoleros, esos asesinos?

PANTALÓN. ¡Justicia! ¡Justicia! ¡Mi dinero! ¡Mi dinero! (_Van saliendo
todos por el orden que se indica. El Doctor y el Secretario se dirigen a
la mesa y se disponen a escribir. Los dos alguaciles de pie, teniendo en
las manos los enormes protocolos del proceso._)

CAPITÁN. Pero ¿es posible lo que vemos, Crispín?

ARLEQUÍN. ¿Es posible lo que sucede?

PANTALÓN. ¡Justicia! ¡Justicia! ¡Mi dinero! ¡Mi dinero!

HOSTELERO. ¡Que los prendan..., que se aseguren de ellos!

PANTALÓN. ¡No escaparán..., no escaparán!

CRISPÍN. Pero ¿qué es esto? ¿Cómo se atropella así la mansión de un
noble caballero? Agradezcan la ausencia de mi señor.

PANTALÓN. ¡Calla, calla, que tú eres su cómplice y has de pagar con él!

HOSTELERO. ¿Cómo cómplice? Tan delincuente como su pretendido señor...,
que él fue quien me engañó.

CAPITÁN. ¿Qué significa esto, Crispín?

ARLEQUÍN. ¿Tiene razón esta gente?

POLICHINELA. ¿Qué dices ahora, Crispín? ¿Pensaste que habían de valerte
tus enredos conmigo? ¿Conque yo pretendí asesinar a tu señor? ¿Conque yo
soy un viejo avaro que sacrifica a su hija? ¿Conque toda la ciudad se
levanta contra mí llenándome de insultos? Ahora veremos.

PANTALÓN. Dejadle, señor Polichinela, que éste es asunto nuestro, que al
fin vos no habéis perdido nada. Pero yo... ¡todo mi caudal, que lo
presté sin garantía! ¡Perdido me veré para toda la vida! ¿Qué será de
mí?

HOSTELERO. ¿Y yo, decidme, que gasté lo que no tenía y aun hube de
empeñarme por servirle como creí correspondía a su calidad? ¡Esto es mi
destrucción, mi ruina!

CAPITÁN. ¡Y nosotros también fuimos ruinmente engañados! ¿Qué se dirá de
mí, que puse mi espada y mi valor al servicio de un aventurero?

ARLEQUÍN. ¿Y de mí, que le dediqué soneto tras soneto como al más noble
señor?

POLICHINELA. ¡Ja, ja, ja!

PANTALÓN. ¡Sí, reíd, reíd!... Como nada perdisteis...

HOSTELERO. Como nada os robaron...

PANTALÓN. ¡Pronto, pronto! ¿Dónde está el otro pícaro?

HOSTELERO. Registradlo todo hasta dar con él.

CRISPÍN. Poco a poco. Si dais un solo paso...(_Amenazando con la
espada._)

PANTALÓN. ¿Amenazas todavía? ¿Y esto ha de sufrirse? ¡Justicia,
justicia!

HOSTELERO. ¡Eso es, justicia!

DOCTOR. Señores... Si no me atendéis, nada conseguiremos. Nadie puede
tomarse justicia por su mano, que la justicia no es atropello ni
venganza, y _summum jus, summa injuria_.[93.1] La Justicia es todo
sabiduría, y la sabiduría es todo orden, y el orden es todo razón, y la
razón es todo procedimiento, y el procedimiento es todo lógica.
_Barbara_, _Celare_, _Dario_, _Ferioque_, _Baralipton_,[93.2] depositad
en mí vuestros agravios y querellas, que todo ha de unirse a este
proceso que conmigo traigo.

CRISPÍN. ¡Horror! ¡Aun ha crecido!

DOCTOR. Constan aquí otros muchos delitos de estos hombres, y a ellos
han de sumarse estos de que ahora les acusáis. Y yo seré parte en todos
ellos; sólo así obtendréis la debida satisfacción y justicia. Escribid,
señor Secretario, y vayan deponiendo los querellantes.

PANTALÓN. Dejadnos de embrollos, que bien conocemos vuestra justicia.

HOSTELERO. No se escriba nada, que todo será poner lo blanco negro... Y
quedaremos nosotros sin nuestro dinero y ellos sin castigar.

PANTALÓN. Eso, eso... ¡Mi dinero, mi dinero! ¡Y después justicia!

DOCTOR. ¡Gente indocta, gente ignorante, gente incivil! ¿Qué idea tenéis
de la Justicia? No basta que os digáis perjudicados si no pareciere bien
claramente que hubo intención de causaros perjuicio, esto es, fraude o
dolo, que no es lo mismo... aunque la vulgar acepción los confunda. Pero
sabed... que en el un caso...

PANTALÓN. ¡Basta! ¡Basta! Que acabaréis por decir que fuimos nosotros
los culpables.

DOCTOR. ¡Y como pudiera ser si os obstináis en negar la verdad de los
hechos!...

HOSTELERO. ¡Ésta es buena![94.1] Que fuimos robados. ¿Quiere más verdad
ni más claro delito?

DOCTOR. Sabed que robo no es lo mismo que hurto; y mucho menos que
fraude o dolo, como dije primero. Desde las doce tablas[94.2] hasta
Justiniano, Triboniano, Emiliano y Triberiano[94.3]...

PANTALÓN. Todo fue quedarnos sin nuestro dinero... Y de ahí no habrá
quien nos saque.

POLICHINELA. El señor Doctor habla muy en razón. Confiad en él, y que
todo conste en proceso.

DOCTOR. Escribid, escribid luego, señor Secretario.

CRISPÍN. ¿Quieren oírme?

PANTALÓN. ¡No, no! Calle el pícaro..., calle el desvergonzado.

HOSTELERO. Ya hablaréis donde os pesará.

DOCTOR. Ya hablará cuando le corresponda, que a todos ha de oírse en
justicia... Escribid, escribid. En la ciudad de..., a tantos... No sería
malo proceder primeramente al inventario de cuanto hay en la casa.

CRISPÍN. No dará tregua a la pluma...

DOCTOR. Y proceder al depósito de fianza por parte de los querellantes,
por que no pueda haber sospecha en su buena fe. Bastará con dos mil
escudos de presente y caución de todos sus bienes...

PANTALÓN. ¿Qué decís? ¡Nosotros dos mil escudos!

DOCTOR. Ocho debieran ser; pero basta que seáis personas de algún
crédito para que todo se tenga en cuenta, que nunca fui
desconsiderado...

HOSTELERO. ¡Alto, y no se escriba más, que no hemos de pasar por eso!

DOCTOR. ¿Cómo? ¿Así se atropella a la Justicia? Ábrase proceso separado
por violencia y mano airada contra un ministro de Justicia en funciones
de su ministerio.

PANTALÓN. ¡Este hombre ha de perdernos!

HOSTELERO. ¡Está loco!

DOCTOR. ¿Hombre y loco, decís? Hablen con respeto. Escribid, escribid
que hubo también ofensas de palabra...

CRISPÍN. Bien os está por no escucharme.

PANTALÓN. Habla, habla, que todo será mejor, según vemos.

CRISPÍN. Pues atajen a ese hombre, que levantará un monte con sus
papelotes.

PANTALÓN. ¡Basta, basta ya, decimos!

HOSTELERO. Deje la pluma...

DOCTOR. Nadie sea osado a poner mano en nada.

CRISPÍN. Señor Capitán, sírvanos vuestra espada, que es también atributo
de justicia.

CAPITÁN. (_Va a la mesa y da un fuerte golpe con la espada en los
papeles que está escribiendo el Doctor._) Háganos la merced de no
escribir más.

DOCTOR. Ved lo que es pedir las cosas en razón. Suspended las
actuaciones, que hay cuestión previa a dilucidar... Hablen las partes
entre sí... Bueno fuera, no obstante, proceder en el ínterin al
inventario...

PANTALÓN. ¡No, no!

DOCTOR. Es formalidad que no puede evitarse.

CRISPÍN. Ya escribiréis cuando sea preciso. Dejadme ahora hablar aparte
con estos honrados señores.

DOCTOR. Si os conviene sacar testimonio de cuanto aquí les digáis...

CRISPÍN. Por ningún modo. No se escriba una letra, o no hablaré palabra.

CAPITÁN. Deje hablar al mozo.

CRISPÍN. ¿Y qué he de deciros? ¿De qué os quejáis? ¿De haber perdido
vuestro dinero? ¿Qué pretendéis? ¿Recobrarlo?

PANTALÓN. ¡Eso, eso! ¡Mi dinero!

HOSTELERO. ¡Nuestro dinero!

CRISPÍN. Pues escuchadme aquí... ¿De dónde habéis de cobrarlo si así
quitáis crédito a mi señor y así hacéis imposible su boda con la hija
del señor Polichinela? ¡Voto a..., que siempre pedí tratar con pícaros
mejor que con necios! Ved lo que hicisteis y cómo se compondrá ahora con
la Justicia de por medio. ¿Qué lograréis ahora si dan con nosotros en
galeras o en sitio peor? ¿Será buena moneda para cobraros las túrdigas
de nuestro pellejo? ¿Seréis más ricos, más nobles, o más grandes, cuando
nosotros estemos perdidos? En cambio, si no nos hubierais estorbado a
tan mal tiempo, hoy, hoy mismo tendríais vuestro dinero, con todos sus
intereses..., que ellos solos bastarían a llevaros a la horca, si la
Justicia no estuviera en esas manos y en esas plumas... Ahora haced lo
que os plazca, que ya os dije lo que os convenía...

DOCTOR. Quedaron suspensos[97.1]...

CAPITÁN. Yo aun no puedo creer que ellos sean tales bellacos.

POLICHINELA. Este Crispín... Capaz será de convencerlos...

PANTALÓN. (_Al Hostelero._) ¿Qué decís a esto? Bien mirado...

HOSTELERO. ¿Qué decís vos?

PANTALÓN. Dices que hoy mismo se hubiera casado tu amo con la hija del
señor Polichinela. ¿Y si él no da su consentimiento?...

CRISPÍN. De nada ha de servirle. Que su hija huyó con mi señor..., y lo
sabrá todo el mundo... Y a él más que a nadie importa que nadie sepa
cómo su hija se perdió por un hombre sin condición, perseguido por la
Justicia.

PANTALÓN. Si así fuera... ¿Qué decís vos?

HOSTELERO. No nos ablandemos. Ved que el bellacón es maestro en
embustes.

PANTALÓN. Decís bien. No sé cómo pude creerlo. ¡Justicia! ¡Justicia!

CRISPÍN. ¡Ved que lo perdéis todo!

PANTALÓN. Veamos todavía... Señor Polichinela, dos palabras.

POLICHINELA. ¿Qué me queréis?

PANTALÓN. Suponed que nosotros no hubiéramos tenido razón para
quejarnos. Suponed que el señor Leandro fuera, en efecto, el más noble
caballero..., incapaz de una baja acción...

POLICHINELA. ¿Qué decís?

PANTALÓN. Suponed que vuestra hija le amara con locura, hasta el punto
de haber huido con él de vuestra casa.

POLICHINELA. ¿Que mi hija huyó de mi casa y con ese hombre? ¿Quién lo
dijo? ¿Quién fue el desvergonzado...?

PANTALÓN. No os alteréis. Todo es suposición.

POLICHINELA. Pues aun así no he de tolerarlo.

PANTALÓN. Escuchad con paciencia. Suponed que todo eso hubiera sucedido.
¿No os sería forzoso casarla?

POLICHINELA. ¿Casarla? ¡Antes la mataría! Pero es locura pensarlo. Y
bien veo que eso quisierais para cobraros a costa mía, que sois otros
tales bribones. Pero no será, no será...

PANTALÓN. Ved[98.1] lo que decís, y no se hable aquí de bribones, cuando
estáis presente.

HOSTELERO. ¡Eso, eso!

POLICHINELA. ¡Bribones, bribones, combinados para robarme! Pero no será,
no será.

DOCTOR. No hayáis[98.2] cuidado, señor Polichinela, que aunque ellos
renunciaran a perseguirle, ¿no es nada este proceso? ¿Creéis que puede
borrarse nada de cuanto en él consta, que son cincuenta y dos delitos
probados y otros tantos que no necesitan probarse?...

PANTALÓN. ¿Qué decís ahora, Crispín?

CRISPÍN. Que todos esos delitos si fueran tantos, son como estos
otros... Dinero perdido que nunca se pagará si nunca le tenemos.

DOCTOR. ¡Eso no! Que yo he de cobrar lo que me corresponda de cualquier
modo que sea.

CRISPÍN. Pues será de los que se quejaron, que nosotros harto haremos en
pagar con nuestras personas.

DOCTOR. Los derechos de justicia son sagrados, y lo primero será
embargar para ellos cuanto hay en esta casa.

PANTALÓN. ¿Cómo es eso? Esto será para cobrarnos en algo.

HOSTELERO. Claro es; y de otro modo...

DOCTOR. Escribid, escribid, que si hablan todos nunca nos entenderemos.

PANTALÓN Y HOSTELERO. ¡No, no!

CRISPÍN. Oídme aquí, señor Doctor. ¿Y si se os pagara de una vez y sin
escribir tanto, vuestros... cómo los llamáis? ¿Estipendios?

DOCTOR. Derechos de justicia.

CRISPÍN. Como queráis. ¿Qué os parece?

DOCTOR. En ese caso...

CRISPÍN. Pues ved que mi amo puede ser hoy rico, poderoso, si el señor
Polichinela consiente en casarle con su hija. Pensad que la joven es
hija única del señor Polichinela; pensad en que mi señor ha de ser dueño
de todo; pensad...

DOCTOR. Puede, puede estudiarse.

PANTALÓN. ¿Qué os dijo?

HOSTELERO. ¿Qué resolvéis?

DOCTOR. Dejadme reflexionar. El mozo no es lerdo y se ve que no ignora
los procedimientos legales. Porque si consideramos que la ofensa que
recibisteis fue puramente pecuniaria y que todo delito que puede ser
reparado en la misma forma lleva en la reparación el más justo castigo;
si consideramos que así en la ley bárbara y primitiva del talión[100.1]
se dijo: ojo por ojo, diente por diente, mas no diente por ojo ni ojo
por diente... Bien puede decirse en este caso escudo por escudo. Porque
al fin, él no os quitó la vida para que podáis exigir la suya en pago.
No os ofendió en vuestra persona, honor, ni buena fama, para que podáis
exigir otro tanto. La equidad es la suprema justicia. _Equitas justicia
magna est._[100.2] Y desde las Pandectas[100.3] hasta Triboniano con
Emiliano Triboniano[100.4]...

PANTALÓN. No digáis más. Si él nos pagara...

HOSTELERO. Como él nos pagara...

POLICHINELA. ¡Qué disparates son éstos, y cómo ha de pagar, ni qué
tratar ahora!

CRISPÍN. Se trata de que todos estáis interesados en salvar a mi señor,
en salvarnos por interés de todos. Vosotros, por no perder vuestro
dinero; el señor Doctor, por no perder toda esa suma de admirable
doctrina que fuisteis depositando en esa balumba de sabiduría; el señor
Capitán, porque todos le vieron amigo de mi amo, y a su valor importa
que no se murmure de su amistad con un aventurero; vos, señor Arlequín,
porque vuestros ditirambos de poeta perderían todo su mérito al saber
que tan mal los empleasteis; vos, señor Polichinela..., antiguo amigo
mío, porque vuestra hija es ya ante el Cielo y ante los hombres la
esposa del señor Leandro.

POLICHINELA. ¡Mientes, mientes! ¡Insolente, desvergonzado!

CRISPÍN. Pues procédase al inventario de cuanto hay en la casa.
Escribid, escribid, y sean todos estos señores testigos y empiécese por
este aposento. (_Descorre el tapiz de la puerta del foro y aparecen
formando grupo Silvia, Leandro, doña Sirena, Colombina y la señora de
Polichinela._)


ESCENA ÚLTIMA

DICHOS, SILVIA, LEANDRO, DOÑA SIRENA, COLOMBINA y la SEÑORA de
POLICHINELA, que aparecen por el foro.


PANTALÓN Y HOSTELERO. ¡Silvia!

CAPITÁN Y ARLEQUÍN. ¡Juntos! ¡Los dos!

POLICHINELA. ¿Conque era cierto? ¡Todos contra mí! ¡Y mi mujer y mi hija
con ellos! ¡Todos conjurados para robarme! ¡Prended a ese hombre, a esas
mujeres, a ese impostor, o yo mismo...!

PANTALÓN. ¿Estáis loco, señor Polichinela?

LEANDRO. (_Bajando al proscenio en compañía de los demás._) Vuestra hija
vino aquí creyéndome malherido acompañada de doña Sirena, y yo mismo
corrí al punto en busca de vuestra esposa para que también la
acompañara. Silvia sabe quién soy, sabe toda mi vida de miserias, de
engaños, de bajezas, y estoy seguro que de nuestro sueño de amor nada
queda en su corazón... Llevadla de aquí, llevadla; yo os lo pido antes
de entregarme a la Justicia.

POLICHINELA. El castigo de mi hija es cuenta mía; pero a ti...
¡Prendedle digo!

SILVIA. ¡Padre! Si no le salváis, será mi muerte. Le amo, le amo
siempre, ahora más que nunca. Porque su corazón es noble y fue muy
desdichado, y pudo hacerme suya con mentir, y no ha mentido.

POLICHINELA. ¡Calla, calla, loca, desvergonzada! Éstas son las
enseñanzas de tu madre..., sus vanidades y fantasías. Éstas son las
lecturas romancescas, las músicas a la luz de la luna.

SEÑORA DE POLICHINELA. Todo es preferible a que mi hija se case con un
hombre como tú, para ser desdichada como su madre. ¿De qué me sirvió
nunca la riqueza?

SIRENA. Decís bien, señora Polichinela. ¿De qué sirven las riquezas sin
amor?

COLOMBINA. De lo mismo que el amor sin riquezas.

DOCTOR. Señor Polichinela, nada os estará mejor que casarlos.

PANTALÓN. Ved que esto ha de saberse en la ciudad.

HOSTELERO. Ved que todo el mundo estará de su parte.

CAPITÁN. Y no hemos de consentir que hagáis violencia a vuestra hija.

DOCTOR. Y ha de constar en el proceso que fue hallada aquí, junta con
él.

CRISPÍN. Y en mi señor no hubo más falta que carecer de dinero, pero a
él nadie le aventajará en nobleza..., y vuestros nietos serán
caballeros... si no dan en salir al abuelo...

TODOS. ¡Casadlos! ¡Casadlos!

PANTALÓN. O todos caeremos sobre vos.

HOSTELERO. Y saldrá a relucir vuestra historia...

ARLEQUÍN. Y nada iréis ganando...

SIRENA. Os lo pide una dama, conmovida por este amor tan fuera de estos
tiempos.

COLOMBINA. Que más parece de novela.

TODOS. ¡Casadlos! ¡Casadlos!

POLICHINELA. Cásense enhoramala. Pero mi hija quedará sin dote y
desheredada... Y arruinaré toda mi hacienda antes que ese bergante...

DOCTOR. Eso sí que no haréis, señor Polichinela.

PANTALÓN. ¿Qué disparates son ésos?

HOSTELERO. ¡No lo penséis siquiera!

ARLEQUÍN. ¿Qué se diría?

CAPITÁN. No lo consentiremos.

SILVIA. No, padre mío; soy yo la que nada acepto, soy yo la que ha de
compartir su suerte. Así le amo.

LEANDRO. Y sólo así puedo aceptar tu amor... (_Todos corren hacia Silvia
y Leandro._)

DOCTOR. ¿Qué dicen? ¿Están locos?

PANTALÓN. ¡Eso no puede ser!

HOSTELERO. ¡Lo aceptaréis todo!

ARLEQUÍN. Seréis felices y seréis ricos.

SEÑORA DE POLICHINELA. ¡Mi hija en la miseria! ¡Ese hombre es un
verdugo!

SIRENA. Ved que el amor es niño delicado y resiste pocas privaciones.

DOCTOR. ¡No ha de ser! Que el señor Polichinela firmará aquí mismo
espléndida donación, como corresponde a una persona de su calidad y a un
padre amantísimo. Escribid, escribid, señor Secretario, que a esto no ha
de oponerse nadie.

TODOS. (_Menos Polichinela._) ¡Escribid, escribid!

DOCTOR. Y vosotros, jóvenes enamorados..., resignaos con las riquezas,
que no conviene extremar escrúpulos que nadie agradece.

PANTALÓN. (_A Crispín._) ¿Seremos pagados?

CRISPÍN. ¿Quién lo duda? Pero habéis de proclamar que el señor Leandro
nunca os engañó... Ved cómo se sacrifica por satisfaceros aceptando esa
riqueza, que ha de repugnar a sus sentimientos.

PANTALÓN. Siempre le creímos un noble caballero.

HOSTELERO. Siempre.

ARLEQUÍN. Todos lo creímos.

CAPITÁN. Y lo sostendremos siempre.

CRISPÍN. Y ahora, Doctor, ese proceso, ¿habrá tierra bastante en la
tierra para echarle encima?

DOCTOR. Mi previsión se anticipa a todo. Bastará con puntuar debidamente
algún concepto... Ved aquí: donde dice... «Y resultando que si no
declaró...», basta una coma, y dice: «Y resultando que sí, no
declaró...» Y aquí: «Y resultando que no, debe condenársele...», fuera
la coma, y dice: «Y resultando que no debe condenársele...»

CRISPÍN. ¡Oh, admirable coma! ¡Maravillosa coma! ¡Genio de la Justicia!
¡Oráculo de la Ley! ¡Monstruo de la Jurisprudencia!

DOCTOR. Ahora confío en la grandeza de tu señor.

CRISPÍN. Descuidad. Nadie mejor que vos sabe cómo el dinero puede
cambiar a un hombre.

SECRETARIO. Yo fui el que puso y quitó esas comas...

CRISPÍN. En espera de algo mejor... Tomad esta cadena. Es de oro.

SECRETARIO. ¿De ley?[104.1]

CRISPÍN. Vos lo sabréis que entendéis de leyes...

POLICHINELA. Sólo impondré una condición. Que este pícaro deje para
siempre de estar a tu servicio.

CRISPÍN. No necesitáis pedirlo, señor Polichinela. ¿Pensáis que soy tan
pobre de ambiciones como mi señor?

LEANDRO. ¿Quieres dejarme, Crispín? No será sin tristeza de mi parte.

CRISPÍN. No la tengáis, que ya de nada puedo serviros y conmigo dejáis
la piel del hombre viejo... ¿Qué os dije, señor? Que entre todos habían
de salvarnos... Creedlo. Para salir adelante con todo, mejor que crear
afectos es crear intereses...

LEANDRO. Te engañas, que sin el amor de Silvia, nunca me hubiera
salvado.

CRISPÍN. ¿Y es poco interés ese amor? Yo di siempre su parte al ideal y
conté con él siempre. Y ahora, acabó la farsa.

SILVIA. (_Al público._) Y en ella visteis, como en las farsas de la
vida, que a estos muñecos como a los humanos, muévenlos cordelillos
groseros, que son los intereses, las pasioncillas, los engaños y todas
las miserias de su condición: tiran unos de sus pies y los llevan a
tristes andanzas; tiran otros de sus manos, que trabajan con pena,
luchan con rabia, hurtan con astucia, matan con violencia. Pero entre
todos ellos, desciende a veces del cielo al corazón un hilo sutil, como
tejido con luz de sol y con luz de luna, el hilo del amor, que a los
humanos, como a estos muñecos que semejan humanos, les hace parecer
divinos, y trae a nuestra frente resplandores de aurora, y pone alas en
nuestro corazón y nos dice que no todo es farsa en la farsa, que hay
algo divino en nuestra vida que es verdad y es eterno y no puede acabar
cuando la farsa acaba.




NOTES


With few exceptions the Notes contain only words and locutions that
require more than translation or a word or two of simple explanation;
for other forms see vocabulary.

Grammatical references, when not given in full, are as follows:

Ramsey = M. M. Ramsey, _A Text Book of Modern Spanish_, New York, 1894.

Bello-Cuervo = Andrés Bello, _Gramática de la lengua castellana... con
extensas notas y un copioso índice alfabético de D. Rufino José Cuervo_,
Paris, 1908.


SIN QUERER

This one-act comedy illustrates Benavente's fondness for ironical and
surprising situations. It is characteristic of the time when he was wont
to make fun of the aristocratic circles of Madrid. The ostensible
purpose of the play is to ridicule the traditional manner of arranging
marriages in Spain. Joined to this is the more simple idea of amusing
the audience. It is interesting to note that Benavente himself acted the
part of Pepe in the first production of the piece, thereby demonstrating
his close relationship with the practical side of the theater. The
Teatro de la Comedia, where the sketch was first shown, is on the Calle
del Príncipe, near the Puerta del Sol, in Madrid. It is devoted to
high-class comedy. Press notices attest that _Sin querer_ was well
received by the public.

[3.1] =con que= 'provided,' 'if only.' The meaning of this conjunction
varies according to whether it is followed by the indicative or the
subjunctive. See vocabulary, under =con=.

[3.2] =que pase= 'let him come in.' Here que introduces the imperative of
the third person; the different uses of =que= must be carefully
distinguished in the three plays of this volume.

[3.3] =nos avisas.= The present indicative, instead of the future or
imperative, for greater vividness.

[3.4] =Porque me haya usted oído= 'Because you may have heard me.' =Porque=
does not influence the mood of =haya=; the subjunctive is governed by an
idea of possibility not expressed, but which might be indicated by =es
posible= or by =se puede=.

[3.5] =una.= An indefinite subject, indicated in English by 'one,' 'we,'
'you,' 'they,' 'people,' etc., is usually expressed in Spanish by the
reflexive. The pronoun =uno= or =una= may, however, replace =se= and it tends
to make the subject less vague.

[3.6] =Tratándose de usted= 'When you are concerned.' Participial
constructions (whether the participle be present or past) are frequently
best translated by dependent clauses.

[3.7] =al pasar= 'in passing,' 'when you pass.' The common use of =al= with
the infinitive, where English has a dependent clause or the present
participle governed usually by 'in,' 'on,' 'upon,' 'while,' etc.

[4.1] =hombre.= A common form of emphatic address, sometimes to be
translated and sometimes to be omitted according to the English context;
=mujer= is similarly employed.

[4.2] =Ya supondrás= 'Of course you must suppose' (or 'imagine'). The
future tense denoting probability is especially prominent in
conversation and therefore in the drama, and must be watched closely. It
may be translated by 'must' or 'can,' or by such words as 'probably,'
'quite,' 'of course.' =Ya= frequently accompanies it.

[4.3] =nuestro corazón.= When reference is made to a part of the body
common to two or more individuals of a group, or to an object possessed
by each one of them, Spanish, unlike English, generally employs a
singular noun.

[4.4] =de... a.= Correlative prepositions equivalent to 'between... and.'

[4.5] =hemos de= 'should.' Perhaps no Spanish locution assumes so many
shades of meaning as =haber de=. It may be rendered by any of the large
number of English words and phrases that denote a mild obligation. When
it occurs in this text, the list of meanings in the vocabulary should
be consulted and the most appropriate one chosen. Moreover, the reader
has ample opportunity, in particular cases, to improve upon any given
list of meanings.

[5.1] =habrá dicho= 'must have told.' The future perfect of probability;
cf. page 4, note 2.

[5.2] =es hora de que= 'it is time that.' Many verbs, adjectives, and
nouns require a preposition before an infinitive in Spanish and in
English. Thus, =es hora de comer= means 'it is time _to_ eat.' But whereas
in English this preposition is omitted before a dependent clause
introduced by 'that,' in Spanish it is usually retained.

[5.3] =Real= (el). A theater in Madrid on the Plaza de Oriente near the
Royal Palace; it is subsidized by the government and is devoted to
opera.

[5.4] =Lo que es= 'As for.' A peculiar use of =lo que= with =ser=, to be
distinguished from its ordinary meanings and from its meanings in
exclamations.

[5.5] =tercer turno.= A term designating one of the sections of season
ticket holders at the Teatro Real. One group holds tickets of =primer
turno=, another of =segundo turno=, and a third of =tercer turno=. Each group
attends only the performances belonging to its turn or section. The
terms do not give much satisfaction if translated literally.

[5.6] =no le importaría= 'he wouldn't mind.' Impersonal verbs occur much
more frequently in Spanish than in English, and it is often wise, in
translating, to change to the personal construction (cf. translation of
=tratándose=, page 3, note 6). However, the impersonal form may well be
retained, if appropriate. In this book consideration is to be given to
such verbs as =antojarse=, =bastar=, =constar=, =convenir=, =gustar=,
=importar=, =pasar=, =pesar=, =placer=, =sentar=, =sobrar=, =suceder=,
=tardarse=, =tratarse=, etc. The vocabulary suggests various
translations.

[5.7] =desde muy niña= 'since you were very young.' Here =muy= is correct
because, in this context, =niña= is virtually an adjective; cf. =muy
hombre=, =muy maestro=, and the English 'very much a man.'

[6.1] =¡Ay, si lo sé!= 'Indeed I do know it,' 'Of course I know it.' It
is not unusual to find =si= after interjections; cf. =¡vaya si lo sé!= Here
=si=, meaning 'whether,' may be regarded as grammatically dependent upon
some verb of asking understood.

[6.2] =no estás para= 'you are not in a position to.' The idiom here has a
different meaning from the usual 'be about to.'

[6.3] =que.= Here elliptical and emphatic; =que= often occurs at the
beginning of a clause, and serves to call attention to what follows,
thereby intensifying the statement; such a =que= cannot be translated. To
understand it we may supply some such word as =parece=, =hay=, =sucede=, etc.

[6.4] =nosotros.= Note the emphatic position of this word, stressed by the
insertion of =se puede decir que=.

[6.5] =¿Cómo había de importarme?= 'How could I have cared?' See page 4,
note 5.

[6.6] =Estaba seguro de que= 'I was sure that.' See page 5, note 2.

[6.7] =enamoradilla= 'slightly in love.' The exact force of certain
Spanish augmentatives and diminutives cannot readily be given in
English. An effort has been made in the vocabulary to suggest suitable
translations wherever a fair degree of accuracy seems attainable.

[6.8] =no se diga= 'there's no denying it,' 'there's no use talking.'
=Decir= is used in several exclamatory or semi-exclamatory expressions
where a different verb would often be employed in English. Attention
will be called to other examples.

[7.1] =Fulanito... Menganito.= =Fulano= regularly corresponds to So-and-So,
John Doe, etc. If a second name is desired, =Mengano= or =Zutano= is used.
The diminutive can scarcely be translated.

[7.2] =cómo se va avispando= 'how clever he is getting.' In progressive
tenses, =ir= emphasizes, more strongly than =estar=, continuity of action.

[7.3] =tonterías.= Contrary to English usage, abstract nouns are often put
in the plural. Translations of such forms are suggested in various ways
in the vocabulary.

[7.4] =¿Qué iba yo a cambiar...?= 'What was I going to change in a saint
[if I married one]?' _i.e._ 'What could I change?' The conditional of
=poder= would be an obvious conventional form, but the imperfect
indicative and the verb =ir= add strength to the question; cf. the English
'What are you going to do about it?'

[7.5] =de gran espectáculo, con mutaciones.= Pepe borrows from theatrical
language to describe vividly the kind of husband for whom Luisa
professes admiration.

[7.6] =me parece.= See page 5, note 6.

[7.7] =Si yo no tengo secretos= 'Why, I haven't any secrets.' =Si= is often
to be translated by 'why,' 'well,' or 'of course,' expressive of
surprise or expostulation. A clause is suppressed for brevity. The full
form would be something like this--=Si yo no tengo secretos... ¿cómo
quieres que te lo diga?=

[7.8] =formal.= Used by Luisa to mean 'real,' 'genuine'; Pepe pretends to
take it in its sense of 'serious' or 'sensible.'

[7.9] =Digo= 'I mean.' See page 6, note 8.

[8.1] =pareció.= According to strict rule, the preterit tense may indicate
any definite past action, even if it took place only a moment ago.
However, for actions so recent that they almost touch the present, the
perfect (_e.g._ =ha parecido=) is the common tense. The preterit, when
sparingly and skilfully applied, adds variety and vigor to the phrase.
It is especially preferred in describing something inevitable. The
English translation requires the perfect (_e.g._ 'has appeared') or
(occasionally) even the present.

[8.2] =quieras que no= 'whether you like it or not.' The full form is =que
quieras o que no quieras=; =que quieras que no= and =quieras o no quieras=
are also found. Ramsey, § 940, says: "The alternative expressions made
by the subjunctive used independently may be regarded as modifications
of the imperative, in which the thing commanded is so indeterminate that
they are mere general permissions." See also, §§ 941, 942.

[8.3] =orejita.= See page 6, note 7.

[8.4] =la tienes.= A frequent conversational substitute for =estar=, which
here would give =está cantando=.

[9.1] =podía.= The imperfect indicative sometimes replaces the conditional
or the =-ra= form of the imperfect subjunctive in the conclusion of a
conditional sentence contrary to fact. Cf. Bello-Cuervo, § 695: "This
use of the imperfect indicative does not occur often; but when properly
used it is emphatic and elegant." See page 7, note 4.

[9.2] =quien.= Note the singular form with a plural antecedent, still
found occasionally; =quien= (from the Latin _quem_) had no plural until
the sixteenth century; see Menéndez Pidal, _Gramática histórica
española_, § 101.

[9.3] =que todo se quede en casa= 'that it should all remain a family
matter.'

[10.1] =que lo envolvía todo= 'that enveloped it all.' See page 15, note
3.

[10.2] =Sí.= The affirmative adverb =sí= is much used to intensify
statements, or to repeat the idea contained in a preceding statement. It
is equivalent to 'indeed,' 'surely,' 'of course,' etc., or to the
English auxiliary verbs used in repetitions; for instance in "I have not
gone to town but he has," the verb 'has' may be rendered by =sí=.

[10.3] =en lo único que= 'the only thing in which.' The word order,
although not strictly logical, is correct and even elegant. In
expressions containing =lo que=, prepositions which logically govern =que=
are often placed before =lo=.

[11.1] =serían.= Following =me atrevo=, present, we should expect =serán=, but
=serían= exemplifies the occasional inaccuracy of everyday speech. Luisa
is narrating past happenings, and is therefore influenced by the
standpoint of the past.

[11.2] =está.= Supply =diciendo=.

[11.3] =que= is elliptical; see page 6, note 3.

[11.4] =cariñosa.= A predicate adjective modifying the subject; English
uses an adverb modifying the verb.

[11.5] =que en qué cosas me fijo.= This =que=, not translatable, is required
to connect =dirás= with the following indirect question, and very often
joins =decir= to succeeding words or statements; cf. =decir que sí= etc.

[12.1] =por complacer.= Before an infinitive =por= ordinarily expresses
cause or reason; when substituted for =para= to indicate purpose, as here,
it implies that the attainment of the object is uncertain; =por que= is
sometimes similarly used instead of =para que=.

[12.2] =porque a ellos les conviniera= 'because it might suit _them_.' See
page 3, note 4.

[12.3] =nunca lo hubiera habido= 'there never would have been any.' =Lo=
refers to a preceding word, phrase, or idea (in this case to =desaire=),
and is translated (if at all) by 'one,' 'some,' 'any,' or 'so.' =Hubiera
habido= is the pluperfect subjunctive of =haber= in the impersonal sense.

[12.4] =por no contrariar.= See page 12, note 1.

[12.5] =pero.= Used to reinforce the repetition; cf. _mais_ in French, and
the occasional use in English of the word 'and,' which is not unsuitable
here.

[13.1] =sales.= See page 3, note 3.

[14.1] =¿A qué ha venido?= 'For what has he come?' 'Why has he come?' This
use of =a= is parallel to its use before an infinitive after =venir= and
other intransitive verbs of motion. In this case =a= expresses purpose.

[15.1] =se.= Ethical dative, best omitted in translation; analysis shows
that the pronoun contains an idea of advantage, or at least of
reference, to the subject.

[15.2] =del botarate de su hijo= 'of his madcap of a son.' In Spanish, as
in English, the preposition merely denotes that what follows is
appositive. There is no change of identity. In Spanish, this
construction is more comprehensive than in English: =el bueno de Juan=.
Note =la ciudad de Madrid= 'the city of Madrid.'

[15.3] =todo lo.= When =todo= precedes a verb of which it is the object, =lo=
also must be used. When =todo= follows the verb, =lo= may be used, but is
not required. See page 10, note 1.

[15.4] =sin contar... con.= See vocabulary under =contar=, and see page 21,
note 1.


DE PEQUEÑAS CAUSAS

_De pequeñas causas_... illustrates Benavente's satirical vein. It seems
to have been written chiefly to amuse; but the plot amply allows for
character study. The pettiness of the reason that finally induces Manuel
to remain in the ministry reminds the listener or reader of the author's
delight in details and in ironical situations. The Teatro de la
Princesa, where the comedy was first performed, is on the Calle de
Tamayo near the Paseo de Recoletos in Madrid. This theater is devoted to
the production of high-class comedy. Contemporary press reports state
that _De pequeñas causas_... was well received. The implication in the
title is that from small causes proceed great results.

[19.1] =está.= Supply =en casa=.

[19.2] =para mí sí= 'for me he _is_'; cf. page 10, note 2.

[19.3] =Nada.= Incomplete in itself; here we might translate: 'Don't say
anything,' 'There's no use talking,' 'Not a word.'

[19.4] =guste.= The personal use of =gustar=; see vocabulary.

[20.1] =señor... señor.= The first =señor= refers to Manuel, and illustrates
a conventional way in which servants address their masters; the second
refers to González. On the stage the servant would make his reference
clear by gestures.

[21.1] =cuenta usted con= 'you have at your disposal.' The idiom =contar
con= assumes many shades of meaning that are developed from the literal
meaning 'count with' or 'reckon with.' When =contar con= occurs in this
book, the list of translations in the vocabulary should be consulted,
and the most suitable one chosen.

[21.2] =¿a qué?= The personal =a= is used for clearness and emphasis. Cf.
Ramsey, § 1318: "Verbs of naming, calling, considering, etc., may take
two direct objects--the true object and the predicate or thing asserted.
The true object takes the distinctive =a=."

[21.3] =pasar por.= Distinguish here between the two meanings 'pass
through' (_i.e._ 'go through with,' 'put up with') and 'pass for' or 'be
regarded as.' Here =pasar por= means 'put up with.'

[22.1] =Me basto.= Personal use of =bastar=; see vocabulary.

[22.2] =Mire usted que= 'Look out' or 'Bear in mind that.' =Mirar= sometimes
assumes peculiar meanings in exclamatory or semi-exclamatory
expressions; note the translation of =que=.

[23.1] =hacer saber= 'make known.' One of the most common formations in
Spanish, and yet frequently hard to translate; =hacer= with the infinitive
is variously rendered by 'make,' 'have,' 'get,' 'cause to,' or 'let'
with the passive.

[24.1] =el señor ministro.= Before a title or before the name of a
relative of the person addressed, =señor= should not be translated unless
the use of 'Mr.' is natural, as in a few cases of direct address; cf.
'Mr. President,' 'Mr. Secretary.'

[24.2] =Si acaso= 'Well perhaps.' If a clause is supplied the meaning of
this expression will be clear; we might say--'If by chance I read any, I
read....'

[24.3] =créditos extraordinarios.= Several terms in this and the
succeeding speech are borrowed by Emilia from financial and ministerial
language; the effect is ironical.

[25.1] =creación.= A gallicism used in Spain as the word 'creation' is
used in England or America in speaking, for instance, of a woman's gown
or hat.

[25.2] =el chic.= A French word, used as a substantive and as an adjective
both in French and in Spanish, which borrows the word.

[26.1] =Si no me ha dicho nada=, etc. Translate =si= by 'why'; see page 7,
note 7.

[26.2] =tomarme.= An ethical dative expressing advantage; hardly
translatable; see page 15, note 1.

[27.1] =Que la acepten o no la acepten= expresses an alternative:
'Whether... or not.' See page 8, note 2.

[27.2] =pero sí= 'but you _have_ seen in me.' See page 10, note 2. In this
case =sí= takes the place of several words.

[28.1] =diputado.= After this word a few lines spoken by Emilia and Manuel
are omitted; it is not believed that their absence obscures seriously
the progress of the plot.

[28.2] =mundo.= Five words spoken by Manuel are omitted.

[28.3] =Lo que ha de ser.= An unfinished statement, easily completed by
adding something to repeat the idea expressed by =ha de ser.= Cf. the
English 'What is to be, must be.'

[29.1] =¡Que no tendrás ocasión!= 'As if you won't have the chance.' Note
the numerous possible translations of =que=.

[29.2] =No es de baile= 'It isn't meant for a ball.' Distinguish between
=ser de= 'belong to' or 'be meant for' and =ser de= 'become of.'

[30.1] =No me explico= 'I don't understand.' The pronoun is indirect
object.

[31.1] =¡Tendría que ver!= A forcible idiomatic expression denoting scorn;
the verb is in the third person; see vocabulary and cf. the English 'I'd
like to see myself [doing such a thing]!'

[31.2] =lo= refers to =sacrificio=. See page 12, note 3.

[31.3] =Sí que= 'Of course,' 'As if.' Sometimes =sí= is connected by =que=
with what follows; the statement is thereby emphasized.

[31.4] =a los hombres os parece= 'you men think.' When a noun is in
apposition with a personal pronoun, it is regularly preceded by the
article, because it is used in a general sense: 'to [all you] men.'

[31.5] =pasarás por= 'you will be regarded as.' See page 21, note 3.

[32.1] =Pepe.= Being put before =lo= (instead of after =deseando=),
=Pepe= seems to be left suspended; it is necessarily followed by a very
slight pause and is to be stressed.

[32.2] =No digas.= Supply =que no= or =nada=. The idea is that the speaker
rejects any contradiction or attempt at denial on the part of the
interlocutor. 'Don't contradict me.' Cf. page 6, note 8.

[32.3] =la toman.= The feminine of a pronoun is often used to indicate
something indefinite. Some feminine noun may be understood to explain
the gender; =cosa= is frequently suggested. Often we cannot know what noun
(if any) is to be supplied. See vocabulary under =tomar=.

[33.1] =donde... tenga=. Equivalent to a relative clause (=donde= = =en= +
relative pronoun) requiring the subjunctive because =tener= (=tenga=)
expresses not reality but an ideal yet to be fulfilled.

[33.2] =aguantaba.= See page 9, note 1. The sentence is ironical;
=cualquiera=, therefore, has the implication of _nobody_.

[34.1] =Y aun piden las mujeres que os concedan.= An abrupt change,
natural in conversation, from the third person to the second.


LOS INTERESES CREADOS

Hardly any of Benavente's plays has made a more favorable impression
than =Los intereses creados=. Not only were the first performances
enthusiastically received by the audiences, but they called forth
highly flattering criticisms. Praise was showered upon the author for
his simplicity and idealism, for the effective symbolism conveyed in the
characters, and for purity, clearness, and poetry of style. (See the
first note, on =el tinglado de la antigua farsa=, page 39, note 2.) So
great was the admiration that a banquet was given in honor of Benavente.
The first performance of the play was in the Teatro Lara, situated on
the Corredera Baja de San Pablo, considerably to the north of the Puerta
del Sol; the Teatro Lara is devoted to comedy and especially to short
productions.

Literally translated, the title is 'Created Interests'; in the course of
the play Crispín explains the application of the term.

_Los intereses creados_ is a product of enthusiasm. The author is glad
for once to turn away from modern themes and to indulge in the freedom
and gayety of the old Italian Comedy of Masks. The masterly prologue
explains to perfection the frame of mind in which Benavente approaches
the old farces, and it also shows wherein he differs from his models.

Attempts to classify this play with other works of Benavente are almost
useless. It can be connected with its fellow productions only by virtue
of fundamental qualities, such as clarity of style, irony, character
study, etc. It would be stretching a point if we called attention to the
nobility of Leandro's character and to the happy ending in order to
insert the play among those that show a serious moral purpose. A more
logical course would be to attribute _Los intereses creados_ to
Benavente's love of romance.

No explanatory or critical statements can rival the prologue. Whatever
critics may decide to call it, the characters live and move, and offer
amusement and food for thought to all classes of persons.

Admirers of _Los intereses creados_ may receive a shock when they turn
to the sequel, _La ciudad alegre y confiada_, in which a tone of
pessimism prevails. Crispín has risen to be the ruler of the city that
he had once entered as a servant, but in spite of his magnificence, his
life is not as joyous as of old. Leandro is not happy as the son-in-law
of Polichinela, nor even as the husband of Silvia. The protagonist of
the piece is El Desterrado, a man once exiled by Crispín, but later
permitted to return to the city. The play was greeted with enthusiasm,
but it does not seem quite to reach the standard of its predecessor. The
atmosphere is surcharged with impending disaster. In the prologue to
_Los intereses creados_ it is stated that the world has aged since the
days of the old farces; we may go further and state that in _La ciudad
alegre y confiada_ the world of _Los intereses creados_ has grown old.

Puppet performances go back to the Italian _commedia dell'arte_ (Comedy
of the Guild, Professional Comedy) which flourished especially in the
sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries. The Italian plays were
for the most part mere scenarios; the speeches were improvised by the
actors. This kind of performance was peculiarly suited to the histrionic
ability of the Italians, and to their genius for gestures. The _commedia
dell'arte_ was received with favor in many countries of Europe, and its
influence was felt by some of the greatest authors. The modern Punch and
Judy show is its direct descendant.

The characters in these old comedies are mostly fixed types with fixed
masks and costumes, and often fixed names, that occur, with additions,
omissions, and variations, in all the plays. Some of them--notably the
braggart soldier, the crafty servant, the lovers, the deceived parents,
and the intermediary--are traced through the Renaissance to the comedies
of Plautus and Terence and to the New Comedy of Athens, nearly all of
which is lost. Others have a later origin. Benavente has achieved
remarkable success in preserving the conventional traits of his figures,
and at the same time in investing them with modern qualities. The more
important masks in _Los intereses creados_ are listed below, with very
brief notes designed to point out the usual characteristics of each,
and, where necessary, certain modifications introduced by Benavente. It
must not be forgotten that each character is carefully delineated both
from the old and from the modern point of view.


THE CHARACTERS IN _LOS INTERESES CREADOS_

SIRENA--the elderly woman who lives by her wits and acts as a go-between
in love affairs.

SILVIA--the typical heroine.

SEÑORA DE POLICHINELA (Punch's wife)--frequently at odds with her
husband; rather a colorless figure in _Los intereses creados_.

COLOMBINA (Columbine, fixed name)--a fairy-like dancer, represented as
wooed by Harlequin.

LEANDRO--the typical hero.

CRISPÍN--the crafty servant.

EL DOCTOR--the pompous, showy, corrupt man of the law.

POLICHINELA (Punch, fixed name)--one of the most prominent puppet
characters, whose general qualities are hard to define; sometimes
described as essentially ridiculous; very often represented as deformed
and as a knave.

ARLEQUÍN (Harlequin, fixed name)--a graceful and acrobatic character,
sometimes supposed to be invisible and a spirit of the air; Benavente
makes him a poet.

EL CAPITÁN--the braggart soldier, considerably toned down in _Los
intereses creados_.

PANTALÓN (Pantaloon, fixed name)--a silly old man (frequently a
merchant) considered a butt of ridicule and fair game for all.

EL HOSTELERO (the Innkeeper)--generally an object of ridicule in all
literature; not particularly connected with the _commedia dell'arte_.

EL SECRETARIO--a fit companion for the Doctor; not particularly
connected with the _commedia dell'arte_.

[39.1] =primer término.= See the following diagram for this and other
stage directions.

(The directions =derecha= and =izquierda= are given from the standpoint of
the actors, not from that of the audience; they are feminine to agree
with =mano=, understood.)

           C                      F
           ________________________
          /                        \
         /                          \
      B /                            \ E
       /                              \
    A /                                \ D


A--D: =proscenio= = front. (The part of the stage between its outer edge
and the curtain.)

A--B: =primera derecha= = front, right.

B--C: =segunda derecha= = back, right.

D--E: =primera izquierda= = front, left.

E--F: =segunda izquierda= = back, left.

A--D--E--B: =primer término= = foreground.

C--F: =foro= = rear, back.

[39.2] =el tinglado de la antigua farsa=. In general, the language of _Los
intereses creados_ is modern; but by the use of well-chosen archaisms
Benavente imparts to this play something of the spirit of the period in
which the events are supposed to take place. The action of the piece is
assigned to the beginning of the seventeenth century.

[39.3] =el Puente Nuevo= _le Pont-Neuf_ (literally 'the New Bridge'). One
of the oldest and most famous bridges in Paris; for a long time the most
frequented spot in the city.

[39.4] =Tabarín.= Assumed name of Jean Salomon (c. 1584-1633), a
celebrated street actor who gave performances in Paris, thereby winning
lasting fame and attracting the attention of famous French authors; the
name is adopted as a type of farcical comedian.

[39.5] =que.= Used instead of =porque= to mean 'for' or 'because'; it occurs
repeatedly in this sense in _Los intereses creados_, and is, in general,
common in all sorts of language, particularly in poetry; but =porque= more
strongly expresses the idea of cause, whereas this =que= expresses an
additional fact without stressing that fact as a cause.

[40.1] =que.= See preceding note.

[40.2] =Lope de Rueda.= A famous itinerant actor-manager and playwright of
the middle of the sixteenth century; he is regarded as the founder of
the modern Spanish theater.

=Shakespeare.= Linked with the old farces by such works as _A Midsummer
Night's Dream_.

=Molière.= Influenced, particularly in his early plays, by the _commedia
dell'arte_.

[40.3] =guiñolesca=. An adjective formed from the Spanish =guiñol= derived
from the French _guignol_, meaning 'Punch' or 'the theater of Punch.'

[40.4] =comedia del Arte.= See page 118.

[40.5] =italiano.= We should expect =italiana=, in agreement with =comedia=;
either =italiano= is a misprint, or it is attracted by the gender of the
masculine =Arte=.

[40.6] =niñerías.= See page 7, note 3.

[41.1] =diga.= Subjunctive on account of the general command involved in
the stage directions, which makes the relative clause indefinite.

[41.2] =en... dado.= The vocabulary should be examined whenever =dar en=
occurs. Not only does this idiom mean 'hit upon,' 'chance upon,' or
'strike,' but it may also signify 'take a notion to.'

[41.3] =Picardía.= A noun of double meaning; as a common noun =picardía=
denotes 'knavery' or 'roguery,' and as a proper noun =Picardía= is the
name of an old province in Northern France centering in the valley of
the Somme, and called Picardie (Picardy). In the thirteenth century
there sprang up in Picardy a sect of heretics who became known as _les
picards_, which came to mean 'rogues,' 'oath-breakers,' etc. François
Villon alludes to them, and they were widely known.

[41.4] =asiento.= Another play on words, for =asiento= means 'seat' or
'bench'; hence the reference to the hardness of a seat in the galleys;
=hacer asiento= is 'make a stop' or 'halt'; the pun is scarcely
translatable.

[42.1] =que=, =malvendiéndolos= (freely translated) 'when, by selling them
(even) at a loss.' Here =que= may be taken as a relative pronoun, direct
object of =malvendiendo=; in this case =los= repeats =que=. Or we may assume
that =que= is a relative pronoun having no grammatical connection with
what follows (_i.e._ the phenomenon known as anacolouthon). This =que=
might also be considered a conjunction introducing an additional
statement that amounts to an objection ('but,' 'for,' 'when'). In any
case the general meaning of the sentence is clear.

[42.2] =desabrido.= See page 11, note 4.

[42.3] =Somos los hombres= 'We men are'; see page 31, note 4.

[42.4] =así.= Used as a conjunction; see vocabulary.

[44.1] =Que ella... sea.= 'May it be.' A modified imperative expressing a
wish. Cf. page 3, note 2.

[44.2] =llamasteis.= As the modern form would be either =llamaste= or =llamó=
(according to whether the speaker uses =tú= or =usted=), =llamasteis= is an
archaism and properly corresponds to the archaic form of address =vos=.
Here living Spanish requires (=usted=) =llamó=, or (=tú=) =llamaste=, if the
speaker may appropriately use =tú=. =Vos= is confined to poetic style, and
to solemn addresses, for instance, to God, to royalty, or to high
dignitaries, etc.

Everywhere in _Los intereses creados_ we find =vos= instead of =usted=
and, consequently, =vuestro= etc. instead of =su= or =de usted=. With
=vos= the verb must of course be in the true second person plural
(_e.g._ =llamáis=). See the note on =la antigua farsa=, page 39, note 2.
See Bello-Cuervo, §§ 234, 235.

[44.3] =fue= is intentionally archaic and is used for emphasis. See page
8, note 1.

[44.4] =llamáis.= See note 2 (just above).

[44.5] =se.= The reflexive makes =estar= connote stopping or delaying or
standing.

[45.1] =que.= This =que= is elliptical. A natural English rendering is made
possible if we use 'or.'

[45.2] =a lo que.= See page 10, note 3.

[46.1] =soy con vosotros= 'I'll attend to you presently.' A special
locution; for, in general, we should expect =estoy=; but for this meaning
=soy= is the correct living form. This phrase has usually a future sense.
Here, the exact time expressed by =soy= may be present and may be future.
This idiom must not be confused with =estar con= denoting locality.

[46.2] =¡Buena la hicisteis!= (Ironically) 'That's a fine thing you've
done!' For the feminine, see page 32, note 3.

[46.3] =Ordenanzas.= Ordinances or police regulations that required (and
still require) Spanish innkeepers to report to the authorities within
twenty-four hours of the arrival of a guest, his name, the place from
which he comes, his business, and other details. A satisfactory
statement of the law is to be found in the _Novísima recopilación, Lib.
III, Tit. XIX, Ley XXVII, 4_. The _Novísima recopilación_ is published
in fairly convenient form in Alcubilla's _Códigos antiguos de España_
(page 1011). Of course the date assigned to the action of _Los intereses
creados_ is anterior to 1805, the year of the formulation of the code
just mentioned; but the legal requirement was approximately the same in
the earlier time.

[46.4] =¡Veníos!= The reflexive with intransitive verbs of motion is
borrowed from a similar construction with transitive verbs (_e.g._
=moverse=, =arrojarse=, etc.) and does not appreciably change the meaning of
the verb; it is probably to be regarded as a mere sign of spontaneity.
See Bello-Cuervo, note 102.

[47.1] =Aretino.= Pietro Aretino (1492-1566), the most notorious literary
blackmailer of the Italian Renaissance; also an author of ability. He
was born in Arezzo (whence Aretino), but is more closely associated with
Venice.

[48.1] =¡Pobres de ellos...!= "When adjectives are used as interjections
before personal pronouns =de= is interposed." Ramsey, § 1431. Translate
'Woe to them...!' Cf. page 15, note 2.

[48.2] =por melancólico.= Supply =ser= and translate 'because it is sad.'

[48.3] =¿Sois vosotros?= In English the verb is in the third person
singular: 'Is it you?'

[49.1] =hagan merced.= An archaism corresponding to the modern =hagan
(ustedes) el favor=.

[49.2] =tengo dedicado.= =Tener= and =llevar= are sometimes used instead of
=haber= with the past participle, after the manner of auxiliaries; but
they are not true auxiliaries, because the participle is treated as an
adjective and therefore agrees with the object in gender and number.
=Tener= really denotes possession and is more emphatic than =haber=.

[49.3] =he menester.= This expression, with =haber= as principal verb, is
not unknown even in modern prose. In general, however, the use of =haber=
as an independent verb is archaic.

[50.1] =¡No miraré nada!= 'I shall not stop at anything!' Cf. page 22,
note 2.

[50.2] =ha= (=más de un mes=). In this sense =hace= is much more common than
=ha= in modern Spanish.

[50.3] =un.= Very commonly used for =una= before a feminine word beginning
with stressed =a= or =ha=; for this apocopation see Bello-Cuervo, § 156.

[51.1] =mírese.= Cf. page 22, note 2; the reflexive adds nothing that can
be rendered into English; it is scarcely more than an ethical dative.

[51.2] =¿Cómo conocidos?= 'How known?' 'What do you mean by known?' An
elliptical expression, not impossible in colloquial English.

[51.3] =Olvidados los tengo.= Note agreement of =olvidados= with =los= and see
page 49, note 2.

[52.1] =vos.= The conventional form of address; see page 44, note 2.

[52.2] =¿Cómo si sabemos?= 'What do you mean by asking if we know?' See
page 51, note 2.

[52.3] =vosotros... vos.= An illustration of the distinction between the
two pronouns; =vosotros=, the real plural, refers to the company
attacking, while =vos=, the artificial plural, refers to the captain; for
the singular form =espada=, see page 4, note 3.

[52.4] =hará que se os trate= 'he will have you treated.' =Hacer= followed
by =que= and the subjunctive, meaning literally 'make that,' 'bring it
about that,' is translated like =hacer= with the infinitive; =que= is
suppressed.

[53.1] =No he librado de mala= 'I've had a narrow escape.' =Librarse de
buena= means 'escape from danger.' The omission of the reflexive makes
the expression briefer and more forceful. For the feminine =mala=
(originally followed, perhaps, by =ventura=), see page 32, note 3.

[53.2] =Agradeceros.= Supply some verb such as =puedo= before the
infinitive; the construction is permissible in English in certain cases;
it makes it appear that the infinitive replaces the indicative. The
statement thereby seems less personal.

[55.1] =hay para.= See vocabulary under =haber= (=hay=).

[55.2] =¡Que una dama se vea!= 'To think that a lady should see herself!'
Another elliptical sentence dependent upon some such expression as =es
posible=.

[56.1] =hasta emplearlo yo= 'until I employed him.' Note that =emplear= is
governed by =hasta= and that =yo= is its subject.

[56.2] =Triste de.= See page 48, note 1.

[56.3] =ser llegado.= A relic of the auxiliary =ser= with intransitive verbs
of motion. This construction is common in Old Spanish, rare in
Cervantes, and almost non-existent now. A few survivals occur even in
prose, and of such survivals =es llegado= is perhaps the most common. See
Bello-Cuervo, § 1119.

[56.4] =no sería= 'could not have been.' Conditional of probability in the
past.

[56.5] =la doña Sirena de mis veinte= 'the doña Sirena that I was at the
age of twenty.' =Años= must be supplied, as is clear from the succeeding
speeches. Colombina pretends to suppose that some other word (_e.g._
=amantes=) might be intended.

[57.1] =creyera.= Imperfect subjunctive, substituted occasionally for the
pluperfect when negation is strong.

[59.1] =Con ser tal.= Equivalent to 'although' and a dependent clause.
With the infinitive =con= denotes means, cause, condition, or concession.
In translating we use sometimes the present participle, and sometimes a
dependent clause.

[59.2] =no anduviera= 'would not be.' When substituted for =ser=, =andar=
usually implies continuance or permanence, and strengthens the
statement.

[59.3] =a no fiar tanto= 'if he did not rely so much.' =A= + infinitive is
commonly equivalent to a conditional clause.

[60.1] =Ya me iréis conociendo= 'you will learn to know me gradually.' See
page 7, note 2.

[61.1] =con ser= 'being.' See page 59, note 1.

[61.2] =¡Si así fuera siempre!= 'If it were only always thus!'--a wish
that cannot be realized.

[62.1] =referidos= 'if told,' 'if they were told.' See page 3, note 6.

[64.1] =se entró.= For the reflexive see page 46, note 4.

[65.1] =anduvimos.= See page 59, note 2.

[66.1] =Ya se me tarda en verle.= This idiom has a very archaic flavor.
See vocabulary, under =tardar=.

[66.2] =vendríais.= An unusual construction; the subjunctive is the normal
form after =temer=. It would appear that in this instance the verb has
lost its emotional character, and has become almost equal to a verb of
believing. The Dictionary of the Spanish Academy admits =sospechar=
('suspect') as a secondary meaning of =temer=.

[66.3] =cómo vengo de sofocada= 'how out of breath I come.' The use of
=cómo= causes the insertion of =de=.

[66.4] =con que.= See page 3, note 1.

[68.1] =habéis.= This is a real plural, referring to Silvia and Leandro.
=Que= may be taken as a conjunction meaning 'so that' or 'for.' If we
consider =que= a relative pronoun, there is no proper antecedent for it;
such a construction, however, would not be impossible in conversation.

[68.2] =jorobas.= Punch is usually represented as a hunchback.

[68.3] =por esos mares= (freely translated) 'on the high seas.' =Ese= at
times assumes a peculiar meaning that defies literal translation. It
refers in a vague way to something on a large scale familiar to
everybody, but particularly familiar to the person addressed. Note the
expression =por esas calles de Dios= and the name of the periodical =Por
esos mundos=.

[69.1] =haciéndole que mire= 'making him look.' See page 52, note 4.

[70.1] =llevo remado.= Note the use of =llevar= as an auxiliary. See page
49, note 2.

[71.1] =lo que me hago.= Ethical dative. See page 15, note 1.

[72.1] =no me importó menos perderme= 'I cared less about being lost,' 'I
didn't even mind being lost.' The preceding clause is in itself
negative; =menos= makes the succeeding negative even stronger. Cf. the
English 'I don't know and care less.'

[72.2] =algo que fuera.= Subjunctive in a relative clause with an
indefinite antecedent.

[74.1] =que= 'until.' A conversational use of =que= for the full =a que=
(_i.e._ =hasta que=).

[75.1] =sigo.= This verb frequently means 'follow,' but when used with the
present participle, it should be translated 'continue' or 'go on.' In
this use it emphasizes, even more strongly than ir, continuity of
action.

[76.1] =decirme.= See page 53, note 2.

[79.1] =como.= Note the use of =como= with the subjunctive in a conditional
sense; see vocabulary.

[80.1] =hayas.= Archaically and poetically used for =tengas=. See page 49,
note 3.

[80.2] =Decidme lo que sea.= 'Tell me what has become.' The subjunctive is
due to the indefiniteness of the relative clause (cf. English 'what may
have become'), because Colombina is uncertain as to Leandro's fate. When
followed by =de= the verb =ser= often takes the meaning 'become of.'

[83.1] =todo lo enamorado y lo fiel y lo noble que tú quieras y ella
pueda desear= 'just as much in love and just as faithful and noble as you
like and she can desire.' =Lo= is used idiomatically before an adjective
followed by a clause with =que=; the adjective agrees with a following
noun or pronoun. The usual translation ('how') is impossible here. =Todo=
intensifies =lo=. For examples see Ramsey, § 1358.

[84.1] =me acusó más de torpe.= If, after =de=, we supply =ser=, the sentence
becomes clear.

[85.1] =¿Piensas... son para olvidarlas?= 'Do you think that the deeds of
Mantua and Florence are (of a nature) to be forgotten?' Note that
Spanish has the active infinitive (literally 'to forget them') where the
passive is used in English. =Las= is superfluous in translation.

[85.2] =Bolonia.= The Italian city of Bologna, especially famous as a
center of legal studies.

[85.3] =considerandos... resultandos.= Typical terms in legal documents
(cf. the Doctor's speech, page 104, lines 1-7). Crispín, making fun of
lawyers' language, uses the words as substantives and in the plural.

[89.1] =haceos del doliente.= An archaism; the modern idiom is =hacerse el
doliente=.

[89.2] =sabré.= Supply =hacer=.

[93.1] =summum jus, summa injuria.= A Latin saying found in Cicero, _De
Officiis_, 1, 10, 33, where it is quoted as proverbial. It means
literally "extreme law (justice) is extreme injustice," and refers to
cases where law is rigorously applied without regard to equity or to
circumstances. As Cicero puts it (in _De Officiis_, just before the
proverb quoted): "Injuries often exist through a certain chicanery and
an over-adroit but malicious interpretation of the law." A similar
phrase is found in Terence, _Heauton Timoroumenos_, vs. 796: =jus summum
saepe summa est malitia=.

[93.2] =Barbara, Celare, Dario, Ferioque, Baralipton.= Terms invented by
medieval scholastic logicians to help in remembering the various forms
(technically, moods) of syllogisms. The words in themselves are
meaningless. Their vowels represent different types of logical
propositions. This jargon (possibly familiar to a few university
graduates) is put in the Doctor's mouth for humorous effect; he is
depicted as fond of displaying learning. A similar legal speech occurs
in _le Bourgeois gentilhomme_ by Molière, Act 2, Scene 6.

[94.1] =¡Ésta es buena!= 'That's a good one!' As to this feminine see page
32, note 3.

[94.2] =las doce tablas.= The twelve tables constituting the first written
compilation of Roman Law, said by Livy and others to have been prepared
in two sections (first ten tables, then two) in the fifth century B. C.
(452 and later) by a decemvirate of which the principal member was
Appius Claudius.

[94.3] =Justiniano.= Justinian (483-565) the best known of the rulers of
the Eastern Roman Empire; he ordered the compilation of the great code
_corpus juris civilis_ ('body of the civil law').

=Triboniano.= Tribonian, a famous jurist, minister under Justinian and one
of the leading compilers of the _corpus juris civilis_.

=Emiliano y Triberiano.= These names are used humorously. Benavente may
have invented them, or he may have meant them as mistaken references of
the Doctor to eminent jurists. Thus Emiliano might be Aemilius
Papinianus, a Roman jurist who lived about 200 A.D., while Triberiano
might relate to the _senatusconsultum Trebellianum_, ascribed to
Trebellius Maximus, a consul in Rome under Nero.

[97.1] =Quedaron suspensos...= This speech, which may or may not be taken
as incomplete, seems to refer to the accusers of Crispín and Leandro,
and to mean 'They are taken aback.' It might also refer to the
suspension of court proceedings. For the preterit, see page 8, note 1.

[98.1] =Ved.= A slight change has to be made in the translation, as is
sometimes the case when =ver= is semi-exclamatory; translate 'look out' or
'be careful about'; cf. the English 'see to.'

[98.2] =hayáis.= See page 80, note 1.

[100.1] =talión.= A word existing also in English; it comes from the Latin
_talio_ and means 'retaliation,' or more precisely a penalty that
consists in making a guilty man suffer the same injury that he caused.

[100.2] =Equitas justicia magna est.= The Latin form of the Spanish
sentence immediately preceding.

[100.3] =las Pandectas= 'the Pandects.' The name given to the compendium
or digest, the most important part of the _corpus juris civilis_,
compiled by Justinian's orders.

[100.4] =Triboniano con Emiliano Triboniano.= The Doctor does not seem
particularly clear in his references. He is, however, true to his
dictatorial and showy character; see page 94, note 3.

[104.1] =¿De ley?=--=Oro de le=y is gold approved by law and therefore
standard; cf. 'legal tender.' Crispín makes a joke by assuming knowledge
of such a thing in a man versed in the law.


_Attention is called to the following remarks_

1. The vocabulary is meant to give English equivalents of words and
locutions as found in this book, and its scope is therefore limited.
Only meanings actually encountered in the text are given except when the
definition illustrates a rare or perplexing usage from which the student
might be led to infer a general usage.

2. The aim has been to combine clearness and consistency, but when a
choice between them has been necessary clearness has been preferred.
Thus, if two or more parts of speech are represented by the same word,
they are sometimes noted separately, and sometimes put under one
heading.

3. When a word found in the text is used both as an adjective and as a
substantive the meanings are placed under one heading (the adjective) if
the English translation can be made by adding such a word as 'man' or
'person' to the adjective. Otherwise separate headings are allotted. If
the word occurs only in the substantive sense, though ordinarily
employed in Spanish as a well-known adjective, both meanings are stated.

4. Where abstract nouns are used in the plural an effort has been made
to indicate possible translations both in the singular and in the plural
if the literal translation does not admit a plural in English.

5. If the same word is used as an adjective and as an adverb separate
entries are generally made. But in the case of such words as =más=, =mucho=,
=poco=, =tanto= and =todo= the meanings are grouped under one heading, because
the distinction between the parts of speech in idiomatic phrases is at
best a shadowy one, and because the list of idioms is lengthy.

6. Proper nouns are translated only when the same or similar names exist
in English.

7. The language to which a foreign word belongs is indicated by an
abbreviation unless a reference to the notes follows.

8. References to the notes are limited to certain stage directions and
to cases where for special reasons the meaning is not given in the
vocabulary.

9. Reflexive verbs are treated variously. If a verb occurs both in its
simple and in its reflexive form the translation of the simple form
alone is given if the reflexive can be rendered by the English reflexive
or by the passive. Otherwise both forms are translated. If a verb occurs
only in the reflexive the simple form is not indicated unless it is
essential to comprehension of the real meaning or to the avoidance of
misunderstanding.

10. Idioms and phrases of various kinds are grouped in alphabetical
order varied only in a few cases where one expression seems to belong
naturally near another. Under verbs, forms containing the simple
infinitive are given first; then come forms with the infinitive and
reflexive, and last those where the verb is conjugated.

11. Wherever the word 'to' is merely 'a sign of the infinitive,' it is
omitted.




VOCABULARY


A

  =a= to, at, after, by, on, upon, according to, in, for, with, from;
    _not translated before personal direct object_;
    =-- no fiar tanto= if he did not rely so much;
    =al= + _inf._ = in, on, upon, while, _etc._ + _pres. part.
     or a dependent clause with finite verb_;
    =al pasar= in passing, when you pass;
    _for meanings of numerous phrases and expressions containing_
   =a=, _see Notes and other headings in this vocabulary_

  =abatido, -a= dejected, downcast

  =abatimiento= _m._ dejection

  =abdicación= _f._ renunciation

  =abierto, -a= (_from_ =abrir=) open;
    =--a= opening into;
    =-- de par en par= wide open

  =ablandarse= be softened, relent

  =abrazado, -a= embracing;
    _see_ =abrazar=

  =abrazar= embrace;
    _see_ =abrazado=

  =abrir= open

  =abstenerse de= refrain from

  =abstuviera= _see_ =abstener=

  =abuelo= _m._ grandfather

  =abusar= abuse;
    =-- de= abuse, presume upon

  =acabar= end, finish;
    =-- por= end by;
    =acabo de= + _inf._ I have just...

  =Academia= _f._ Academy

  =acampar= take quarters, take lodgings

  =acariciar= caress

  =acaso= perhaps;
    =si --= well, perhaps

  =acción= _f._ action

  =acepción= _f._ acceptation, opinion, belief

  =aceptable= acceptable

  =aceptar= accept

  =acerca de= about, concerning

  =acercarse= approach

  =acertado, -a= right, correct, proper;
    =andar --= be right;
    _see_ =acertar=

  =acertar= hit the mark, succeed;
    _see_ =acertado=

  =aciago, -a= melancholy, sad

  =aclarar= make clear

  =acobardarse= become frightened, flinch

  =acoger= receive;
    =--se a= resort to

  =acomodarse a= adapt oneself to, put up with

  =acompañamiento= _m._ retinue

  =acompañar= accompany, go with

  =aconsejar= advise

  =acordarse= (=de=) remember

  =acostaos= (=acostad + os=)

  =acostarse= lie down, go to bed

  =acostumbrar= be accustomed;
    =--se= accustom oneself, become accustomed

  =acreditar= accredit, prove

  =actitud= _f._ attitude

  =acto= _m._ act

  =actor= _m._ actor

  =actuación= _f._ operation, proceeding

  =actual= actual, present

  =actualmente= actually, at present

  =acudir= come;
    =-- a= come to, repair to, attend, have recourse to, resort to

  =acuerdo= _m._ agreement;
    =de -- con= in agreement _or_ accordance with;
    =estar de --= be agreed, agree;
    =ponerse de --= come to an agreement

  =acusar= (=de=) accuse (of);
    =-- de= + _adj._ accuse (_someone_) of being

  =adaptar= adapt

  =adecuado, -a= suited

  =adelantado, -a= advanced;
    =por --= in advance

  =adelante= ahead, forward, onward;
    =¡--!= come in!;
    =más --= further on, later;
    =salir --= get out, emerge, escape;
    =seguir --= go ahead, advance

  =ademán= _m._ gesture, manner

  =además= besides

  =adeudado, -a= indebted, owed;
    =todo lo --= all that is due

  =adiestrar= train

  =admirable= admirable

  =admirablemente= admirably

  =admiración= _f._ admiration;
    =admiraciones= admiration, admiring remarks

  =admirar= admire, wonder at

  =admitir= admit, allow

  =Adonis= _m._ Adonis (_according to classical mythology,
   a beautiful youth; used as a type of masculine beauty_)

  =adoptar= adopt

  =adoptivo, -a= adoptive, adopted

  =adorable= adorable

  =adorar= adore, worship

  =adquieren= _see_ =adquirir=

  =adquirir= acquire, gain, secure

  =aduana= _f._ customhouse

  =advertencia= _f._ notice, warning

  =advertir= notify, give notice, warn

  =advierta= _see_ =advertir=

  =adviert-o, -e= _see_ =advertir=

  =afán= _m._ anxiety, eagerness;
    =tener tanto --= be so eager

  =afectísimo, -a= most affectionate, very affectionate, most sincere

  =afecto= _m._ affection, feeling

  =aficionarse de= become fond of

  =afirmar= affirm, declare;
    =--se= hold fast, take a firm hold

  =afortunadamente= fortunately

  =afrentoso, -a= ignominious

  =agasajar= entertain

  =agasajo= _m._ entertainment

  =agradecer= be grateful _or_ thankful for, thank, thank for

  =agradezcan= _see_ =agradecer=

  =agrado= _m._ agreeableness, pleasure

  =agravio= _m._ offense, insult, wrong

  =agrisado, -a= grayish

  =agua= _f._ water;
    =tomar las --s= take the waters

  =aguantar= endure, stand, put up with

  =aguardar= await, wait for

  =agudeza= _f._ sharpness, wittiness

  =aguileño, -a= aquiline

  =¡ah!= ah! oh!
    =¡-- de la hostería!=
    =¡-- de la gente!= _etc._ hallo there, hotel! hallo there, people! _etc._

  =ahí= there, here;
    =de --= from there, from that situation

  =ahora= now, presently;
    =de --= of the present (_moment_);
    =hasta --= till now; we'll see you again presently;
    =-- mismo= this very minute

  =ahorrar= save, spare

  =airado, -a= angry, furious;
    =mano airada= assault and battery

  =aire= _m._ air, demeanor;
    =darse --s= put on airs

  =ajustar= adjust, regulate

  =ala= _f._ wing

  =alabanza= _f._ praise, eulogy;
    =propia --= self-praise

  =alargar= lengthen, extend;
    =--se= be prolonged;
    =--se en palabras= say _or_ talk too much

  =alargues= _see_ =alargar=

  =alarmar= alarm

  =albergar= lodge, shelter

  =alboroto= _m._ disturbance, excitement, tumult

  =alcance= _m._ reach;
    =al -- de= in _or_ within reach of

  =aldabón= _m._ large knocker, knocker (_of a door_)

  =aldeano, -a= belonging to a village, rustic

  =alegrarse= rejoice, be glad;
    =¡cuánto me alegro!= how glad I am!

  =alegre= gay, happy, joyous

  =alegría= _f._ joy, gayety

  =algo= something, anything; somewhat;
    =-- de= some, a certain amount of;
    =en --= to some extent;
    =cobrarle a uno en --= collect something from somebody;
    =para --= for some purpose;
    =por --= for some reason

  =alguacil= _m._ constable

  =alguacilillo= _m._ (_dim. of_ =alguacil=) little constable, petty constable

  =alguien= somebody, someone

  =algún, alguno, -a= some, any;
    =alguna vez= occasionally, now and then;
    =algunas veces= sometimes;
    =--= _pron._ some, someone

  =aliado= _m._ ally

  =alimentar= feed, nourish, support

  =aliviar= relieve

  =alma= _f._ soul, heart

  =almuerzo= _m._ breakfast, lunch (_first substantial meal of the day_)

  =alondra= _f._ lark

  =alrededor= around, about;
    =a vuestro --= around you

  =alterado, -a= disturbed, wrought up; _see_ =alterar=

  =alterar= alter, change;
    =--se= be stirred up, be disturbed; _see_ =alterado=

  =altísimo, -a= most lofty, very lofty

  =altivo, -a= lofty, noble

  =alto, -a= high, tall, eminent, upper;
    =en --= on high

  =¡alto!= halt!

  =altura= _f._ height

  =alumno= _m._ pupil, student

  =allegado= _m._ friend, ally

  =allegado, -a= related;
    =muy --= closely related

  =allí= there

  =amable= amiable, sweet, kind

  =amanecer= dawn;
    =al --= at dawn

  =amante= _m._ lover

  =amante= loving

  =amantísimo, -a= most loving, most affectionate

  =amar= love

  =amargura= _f._ bitterness

  =ambición= _f._ ambition

  =ambicioso, -a= ambitious

  =amenazar= threaten;
    =-- con= + _inf._ threaten to

  =ameno, -a= pleasing, delightful

  =amenudo= often

  =amiga= _f._ friend

  =amigo= _m._ friend

  =amigote= _m._ (_aug._ of =amigo=) dear friend, fine friend (_ironical_)

  =amistad= _f._ friendship;
    =músicos y poetas de mi --= musicians and poets of my acquaintance

  =amistosamente= in a friendly manner

  =amo= _m._ master

  =amoldarse a= shape oneself to, conform to

  =amor= love;
    =--es= love affairs, love;
    =-- propio= self-love, self-esteem

  =amoroso, -a= loving, affectionate, gentle

  =ampararse de= shelter oneself in, take refuge in

  =amparo= _m._ protection

  =amplio, -a= ample, broad

  =ancho, -a= broad

  =andanza= _f._ event;
    =tristes --s= bad fortune

  =andar= go, walk, move; be;
    =-- acertado= be right;
    =-- discreto= be considerate;
    =no -- con rodeos= be too out-spoken, take too many liberties

  =andrajo= _m._ rag, tatter

  =anduviera= _see_ =andar=

  =anduvimos= _see_ =andar=

  =angustia= _f._ anguish, affliction

  =angustioso, -a= tormenting, distressing

  =animal= _m._ animal

  =animarse= become animated or enlivened

  =animus= (_Lat._) spirit;
    =-- belli= war-like spirit

  =aniñar= make childish

  =anoche= last night

  =ante= before;
    =-- todo= before all, above all

  =antecámara= _f._ anteroom

  =antes= _adv._ first, before, formerly, rather;
    =-- que= rather than;
    =-- que todo= first of all, above all;
    =-- de= _prep._ before;
    =-- (de) que= _conj._ before

  =anticipar= anticipate;
    =--se a= anticipate, forestall

  =Anticristo= _m._ Antichrist

  =antiguo, -a= ancient, old,
  former; =de --= of old

  =antipático, -a= disagreeable, unpleasant, repellent

  =antitético, -a= antithetical, opposed

  =antítesis= _f._ antithesis, contrast

  =antojarse= take it into one's head, take a notion to;
    =a nuestros padres se les antoja= our fathers take it into their heads

  =antología= _f._ anthology

  =antorcha= _f._ torch

  =anuncio= _m._ announcement, advertisement

  =año= _m._ year;
    =a los catorce --s= at the age of fourteen years

  =apagar= extinguish, allow to die away

  =aparecer= appear

  =aparición= _f._ appearance

  =aparte= aside;
    =-- de= aside from

  =apasionarse= become impassioned _or_ excited;
    =-- por= become impassioned at, be enthusiastic about

  =apedrear= stone, throw stones at

  =apenas= _adv._ hardly, scarcely;
    _conj._ scarcely, as soon as

  =aplazamiento= _m._ postponement

  =apocado, -a= low-spirited, discouraged

  =Apocalipsis= _m._ Apocalypse

  =apogeo= _m._ (greatest) height

  =aposento= _m._ room, apartment

  =apreciar= appreciate, esteem, value

  =apremiar= press

  =aprender= learn

  =apresurarse= hurry, make haste, hasten

  =aprovechar= profit by;
    =--se de= take advantage of, profit by

  =aptitud= _f._ aptitude, quality

  =apto, -a= apt, fit, suited

  =apuesto, -a= elegant, spruce

  =apurar= exhaust

  =apuro= _m._ want, trouble, affliction

  =aquel, -la= that, former

  =aqu-él=, =-élla=, =-ello= that one, the one, the former, that

  =aquí= here;
    =por --= over here, this way;
    =he --= behold, here is

  =aquilatar= examine, weigh

  =arboleda= _f._ grove

  =arcaico, -a= archaic

  =Aretino= _m._ _see page 47, note 1_

  =Arlequín= _m._ Harlequin _see page 119_

  =arma= _f._ arm, weapon;
    =dar --s a= give arms to, give a handle to, play into the hands of

  =armado, -a= armed;
    =a mano armada= with arms, with violence

  =aroma= _m._ perfume

  =arrastrar= drag;
    =--se= crawl

  =arreglar= arrange

  =arreglo= _m._ arrangement

  =arriba= above, upstairs;
    =hacia --= upward;
    =los de --= those above;
    =para --= and upward

  =arriesgar= risk, venture

  =arrojar= throw

  =arruinar= ruin

  =arte= _m._ (_pl. f._) art, artistry, skill;
    =comedia del Arte= _see page 118_

  =artificio= _m._ workmanship, craft, artifice, pretense;
    =fuegos de --= fireworks

  =asado= _m._ roast

  =asaltar= assault;
    =-- a mano armada= assault with arms, commit assault and battery upon

  =asegurar= assure, assert, affirm;
    =--se= make sure;
    =--se de= assure oneself of, make sure of

  =asesinar= murder, commit murder

  =asesino= _m._ assassin, murderer

  =así= _adv._ so, thus, of such a nature;
    _conj._ even if;
    =un vestido --= such a dress;
    =-- como= just like

  =asiento= _m._ seat, bench, stop;
    =hacer --= make a stop _or_ halt

  =asistir a= attend, be present at, witness

  =aspiración= _f._ aspiration, ambition

  =aspirar= aspire

  =astucia= _f._ cunning

  =asunto= _m._ matter, subject, affair, thing;
    =-- concluido= the matter is settled

  =asustar= frighten, startle

  =atajar= intercept, stop

  =atavío= _m._ adornment, finery

  =atención= _f._ attention;
    =llamar la --= attract attention;
    =llamar más la --= attract greater attention

  =atender a= attend to, serve, heed

  =atenerse a= abide by, stick to, depend upon

  =atento, -a= attentive, courteous, polite

  =atractivo= _m._ attraction, charm

  =atraer= attract

  =atrapar= catch

  =atreverse= dare, venture;
    =-- a mucho= dare (_to do_) a great deal;
    =-- a tanto= dare (_to do_) so much, venture upon so much;
    =-- contra= dare to oppose;
    _see_ =atrevido=

  =atrevido, -a= bold, daring;
    _see_ =atreverse=

  =atrevimiento= _m._ boldness, daring, audacity

  =atributo= _m._ attribute

  =atropellar= trample upon, do violence to

  =atropello= _m._ abuse, violence;
    _see_ =atropellar=

  =audaz= bold

  =audiencia= _f._ audience, hearing

  =auditorio= _m._ audience

  =aumentar= increase, grow

  =aumento= _m._ increase

  =aun= _or_ =aún= yet, still, even, still more

  =aunque= although, even if

  =aurora= _f._ dawn

  =ausencia= _f._ absence

  =ausentarse= absent oneself, go away

  =automóvil= _m._ automobile

  =autor= _m._ author

  =autoridad= _f._ authority

  =auxilio _m._ help, aid=

  =avance= _see_ =avanzar=

  =avanzar= advance, proceed, go ahead

  =avariento, -a= miserly;
    =¡viejo --!= old miser!

  =avaro, -a= avaricious, niggardly;
    =un viejo --= an old miser

  =avenencia= _f._ agreement, compromise

  =aventajar= surpass

  =aventura= _f._ adventure

  =aventurero= _m._ adventurer

  =avergonzarse de= be ashamed of, blush for

  =averiguar= investigate, find out

  =avestruz= _m._ ostrich

  =avisar= inform, notify

  =aviso= _m._ notice, warning

  =avispar= rouse, spur;
    =se va avispando= he is becoming lively _or_ clever

  =¡ay!= oh! alas!

  =aya= _f._ governess

  =ayer= yesterday;
    =-- por la tarde= yesterday afternoon

  =azaroso, -a= hazardous, dangerous

  =azul= blue


  B

  =bagaje= _m._ baggage

  =¡bah!= bah! pshaw!

  =bailar= dance

  =bailarín= _m._ dancer

  =baile= _m._ dance, ball

  =bajar= go down, come down, descend;
    lower;
    go toward the front of the stage

  =bajeza= _f._ meanness, vileness

  =bajito, -a= (_dim. of_ =bajo=) short

  =bajo, -a= low, despicable, vile

  =bajo= _adv._ meanly, humbly;
    _prep._ under

  =balbuceo= _m._ stammering, stuttering;
    =fingir --s= pretend to stammer (_as if speaking like a child_)

  =balcón= _m._ balcony

  =balumba= _f._ heap, pile, bulk

  =banda= _f._ sash, scarf

  =bandido= _m._ bandit

  =bandolero= _m._ highwayman

  =Baralipton= _see page 93, note 2_

  =barato, -a= cheap

  =barba= _f._ beard

  =Barbara= _see page 93, note 2_

  =bárbaro, -a= barbarous, barbaric

  =barbilindo= _m._ well-shaved, well-groomed _or_ effeminate man, milksop

  =base= _f._ basis, foundation

  =bastante= enough, sufficiently, very, much;
    =lo --= enough, sufficiently

  =bastar= suffice, be enough;
    =--le a uno con= be satisfied to;
    =me basta con= I'm satisfied to;
    =¡basta!= enough!
    =¡basta de!= enough of!
    =--se= be sufficient unto oneself

  =batalla= _f._ battle;
    =dar la --= start the battle _or_ struggle, cast the die

  =beber= drink

  =bellaco= _m._ rogue, swindler

  =bellacón= _m._ (_aug. of_ =bellaco=) big rogue, scoundrel

  =belleza= _f._ beauty

  =belli= (Lat.) of war;
    =animus --= war-like spirit

  =bello, -a= beautiful

  =bergante= _m._ ruffian

  =besar= kiss

  =Biblia= _f._ Bible

  =bien= _m._ good, welfare;
    =--es= property, wealth

  =Bien= _adv._ well;
    =-- os está por= you're in a fine fix for;
    =más --= rather

  =blanca= _f._ mite (_name of old copper coin_);
     =estar sin --= be penniless;
    =sin soltar --= without spending _or_ paying a cent

  =blanco, -a= white;
    =poner lo -- negro= make white seem black

  =blasfemia= _f._ blasphemy

  =bobo= _m._ fool

  =boceto= _m._ sketch

  =boda= _f._ wedding, marriage;
    =--s= nuptials, wedding, marriage

  =Bolonia= _f._ Bologna

  =bombarda= _f._ bombard (_an ancient piece of artillery_)

  =bondad= _f._ goodness, kindness

  =bondadoso, -a= kind, generous

  =bonito, -a= pretty, attractive, fine

  =borrar= strike out, blot out, erase;
    =lo borrado= what is blotted out

  =borrón= _m._ blot

  =botarate= _m._ madcap, booby

  =botella= _f._ bottle

  =bravo, -a= brave, severe, rude, forceful;
    =acogerse a lo --= resort to force _or_ violence

  =brazo= _m._ arm

  =breve= brief, short

  =bribón= _m._ rogue, rascal

  =brillante= brilliant

  =broma= _f._ joke;
    =echarlo a --= make a joke of it

  =buen(o), -a= good, kind;
    =de buenas a primeras= suddenly;
    =¡buena la hicisteis!= that's a fine thing you've done!
    =¡ésta es buena!= that's a good one!

  =¡bum! ¡bum! ¡bum!= boom! boom! boom! (_imitation of sound of artillery_)

  =burla= _f._ scoffing, mockery, jest, joke, fun;
    =de --= in jest, in fun;
    =estar para --s= be in a mood for jokes

  =burlar= outwit, evade;
    =--se= make fun;
    =--se de= make fun of

  =burlón, -ona= mocking, mischievous

  =busca= _f._ search, pursuit;
    =en -- de= in search of;
    =en -- nuestra= in search of us

  =buscar= look for, seek;
    =ir a --= go to seek, go for

  =busquemos= _see_ =buscar=


  C

  =cabalgadura= _f._ mount, beast

  =caballero= _m._ gentleman, nobleman, sir

  =cabeza= _f._ head

  =cabizbajo, -a= with bowed head, crestfallen

  =cabo= _m._ end;
    =llevar a --= carry out, complete, fulfil

  =cada= each, every;
    =de -- parte= on each side;
    =-- uno= each one, every one

  =cadena= _f._ chain

  =caer= fall;
    =-- en= fall into;
    =-- sobre= fall upon, chance upon

  =café= _m._ café

  =calidad= _f._ quality, position, rank;
    =dama de --= lady of distinction, distinguished lady;
    =persona de --= person of distinction

  =calma= _f._ calm, calmness

  =calumniar= calumniate, slander

  =callar= be silent, become silent, keep silent

  =calle= _f._ street

  =cambiar= change, exchange

  =cambio= _m._ change, exchange;
    =casa de --= money exchange;
    =en --= on the other hand

  =camino= _m._ road, highroad, way;
    =de --= on the way, in the course of events;
    =la fruta del --= the fruit on the wayside;
    =llevar mejor --= follow a better course

  =camisero= _m._ haberdasher, men's clothier

  =campo= _m._ field, country;
    field (_of political activity_);
    =Campos Negros= Black Fields (_name of an imaginary place_)

  =canción= _f._ song

  =cansancio= _m._ weariness, fatigue

  =cansar= weary, tire;
    =--se= get tired

  =cantar= sing

  =cantor= _m._ singer

  =capaz= capable

  =capitán= _m._ captain

  =capítulo= _m._ chapter, article, heading

  =capricho= _m._ caprice, fancy, whim

  =caprichoso, -a= capricious, whimsical, changeable

  =cara= _f._ face;
    =mirarte a la --= look at your face

  =¡caracoles!= hallo! is that so!

  =carácter= _m._ character, quality

  =carecer de= lack, be without

  =cargado, -a= charged, weighed down, full

  =cargo= _m._ burden, load, charge, duty;
    =a -- de= in the hands of;
    =a tu --= in your charge _or_ hands;
    =a mi -- corre= it is my affair _or_ duty

  =caricatura= _f._ caricature

  =cariño= _m._ affection, love

  =cariñoso, -a= affectionate

  =Carlos= _m._ Charles

  =carne= _f._ meat;
    =-- de horca=, gallows bird

  =carnero= _m._ sheep, mutton

  =caro, -a= dear, expensive, costly

  =caro= _adv._ dearly, at a high price

  =carrera= _f._ career

  =carro= _m._ cart, car

  =carroza= _f._ carriage, coach

  =carta= _f._ letter;
    =-- de crédito= letter of credit, credential;
    =por --= by letter

  =cartera= _f._ (ministerial) portfolio

  =cartón= _m._ pasteboard, card-board

  =casa= _f._ house, home;
    =-- de cambio= money exchange;
    =-- de misericordia= almshouse;
    =a -- de= to the house _or_ home of;
    =en --= at home

  =casadero, -a= marriageable

  =casar= marry off, unite in marriage, marry;
    =--se con= marry;
    =¡a casaros!= get married!

  =casi= almost

  =casita= _f._ (_dim. of_ =casa=) small house, cottage

  =caso= _m._ case, matter, fact, circumstance, situation;
    =el -- es que= the fact is that;
    =en ese --= in that case;
    =en este --= in this case;
    =para el --= under the circumstances;
    =creerse en el -- de= think oneself called upon to;
    =hacer --= care;
    =hacer -- a= pay attention to (_a person_)

  =castellano, -a= Castilian, Spanish

  =castigar= punish

  =castigo= _m._ punishment

  =castigu-e, -éis= _see_ =castigar=

  =castillo= _m._ castle

  =casualidad= _f._ chance, accident;
    =da la --= it happens by chance, chance has it

  =catorce= fourteen;
    =a los -- años= at the age of fourteen years

  =caución= _f._ surety, security

  =caudal= _m._ fortune, wealth, property, treasure, stock, supply

  =causa= _f._ cause, reason;
    =por mi --= on my account;
    =hacer --=
    =con= make common cause with, join

  =causar= cause

  =cayó= _see_ =caer=

  =ceder= yield, give up

  =cédula= _f._ slip of paper, paper

  =Celare= _see page_ 93, _note_ 2

  =celebrar= celebrate

  =celo= _m._ zeal, ardor

  =cena= _f._ supper

  =Cenicienta= _f._ Cinderella

  =centro= _m._ center

  =ceñudo, -a= frowning

  =cerrar= close, shut

  =cielo= _m._ sky, heaven, heavens

  =ciencia= _f._ science

  =cierto, -a= certain, sure, true;
    =por --= certainly;
    =¿conque era --?= so it was true?
    =¡no es --!= it isn't so!
    =un --= a certain

  =cierto= _adv._ certainly

  =cigarro= _m._ cigarette

  =cinco= five

  =cincuenta= fifty

  =cinematógrafo= _m._ moving-picture show

  =circulación= _f._ circulation

  =circunstancia= _f._ circumstance

  =ciudad= _f._ city

  =clamar= cry out

  =clamor= _m._ outcry

  =claramente= clearly

  =clarín= _m._ clarion, bugle

  =claro, -a= clear, bright, radiant;
    =-- que= it is clear that, clearly

  =claro= _adv._ clearly

  =clase= _f._ class;
    =-- de español= class in Spanish

  =clásico, -a= classical

  =cobrar= collect, receive, obtain, get;
    =--le a uno en algo= collect something from somebody;
    =--se= rehabilitate oneself

  =cocinero= _m._ cook

  =coche= _m._ coach, carriage

  =colectivo, -a= collective

  =colegio= _m._ school, college

  =colocar= place

  =Colombina= _f._ Columbine _see page_ 119

  =color= _m._ color

  =coma= _f._ comma

  =combatir= fight, struggle

  =combinar= combine, unite

  =comedia= _f._ comedy;
    =-- del Arte= _see page_ 118;
    =Teatro de la Comedia= _see page_ 107

  =comedido, -a= moderate, considerate, courteous

  =comedor= _m._ dining room

  =comenzar= begin

  =comer= eat

  =comerciante= _m._ merchant, trader

  =cometer= commit

  =comida= _f._ dinner

  =comisionar= commission

  =como= like, as, since;
    =--= + =_subj._= if, provided that;
    =así --= just like;
    =el modo --= the way in which;
    =-- que= seeing that;
    =-- si= as if;
    =tanto= (...) =--= as much as, as well as, the same as

  =¿cómo?= how? what?

  =comodidad= _f._ comfort

  =compañero= _m._ companion

  =compañía= _f._ company;
    =señora de --= companion

  =comparar= compare

  =compartir= share

  =compasión= _f._ compassion, pity

  =complacer= please

  =completo, -a= complete

  =cómplice= _m._ accomplice

  =compondrá= _see_ =componer=

  =componer= compose, write; fix up, arrange

  =comprar= buy

  =comprender= understand, comprehend; include, comprise;
    =todo comprendido= everything included

  =comprometer= compromise;
    =--se a= bind oneself to

  =compromiso= _m._ compromise, obligation, engagement

  =compuse= _see_ =componer=

  =común= common

  =comunicar= communicate

  =comunidad= _f._ community, family

  =comúnmente= commonly

  =con= with, by, on account of;
    =--= + _inf._ by, although, on account of;
    =-- que= so;
    =-- que= + _subj._ provided, if only;
    _for meanings in various expressions, see Notes and other
    headings in this vocabulary_

  =concebir= conceive

  =conceder= concede, grant

  =concepción= _f._ conception

  =concepto= _m._ conception, idea, thought, opinion

  =concesión= _f._ concession

  =conciencia= _f._ conscience, consciousness

  =concluir= end, finish, complete;
    =-- por= end by;
    =asunto concluido= the matter is settled

  =concurso= _m._ gathering

  =condenar= condemn

  =condición= _f._ condition, position, rank, lot, fate, quality

  =conducir= conduct, take

  =conducta= _f._ conduct, behavior

  =conferencia= _f._ conference

  =conferenciar= have a conference

  =confesar= confess

  =confianza= _f._ confidence, trust

  =confiar= confide, trust;
    =-- en= confide in, trust in

  =confieso= _see_ =confesar=

  =conflicto= _m._ conflict

  =conforme= alike;
    =estar --= be agreed, agree

  =confortar= comfort

  =confundir= confound, confuse

  =confusión= _f._ confusion

  =Congreso= _m._ House _(corresponding approximately to House
   of Representatives in the United States)_

  =conjunto= _m._ whole, _ensemble, tout ensemble_

  =conjurar=, conspire, plot;
   =conjurado, -a= in league, in conspiracy

  =conmigo= with me

  =conmover= move, affect, soften

  =conmueve= _see_ =conmover=

  =conocedor= _m._ knower, one who understands, expert

  =conocer= know, be acquainted with, meet, comprehend;
    =-- a fondo= know thoroughly;
    =¡cómo se conoce!= how easy it is to see!

  =conocimiento= _m._ knowledge, understanding

  =conozcamos= _see_ =conocer=

  =conozco= _see_ =conocer=

  =conquista= _f._ conquest

  =conquistar= conquer, gain

  =consagración= _f._ consecration, place of honor

  =consagrar= dedicate

  =conseguir= obtain;
    =--= + _inf._ succeed in, manage to;
    =-- que= bring it about that, manage that

  =consejo= _m._ advice;
    _prop. n._ Council, Cabinet

  =consentimiento= _m._ consent

  =consentir= consent, allow;
    =-- en= consent _or_ agree to

  =considerando= _see page 85, note 3_

  =considerar= consider

  =consiente= _see_ =consentir=

  =consigo= with himself, with him

  =consigo= _see_ =conseguir=

  =consigu-e, -en= _see_ =conseguir=

  =consintiera= _see_ =consentir=

  =conspiración= _f._ conspiracy

  =constar= be clear, be evident; be recorded, be entered

  =constituir= constitute, form, make up;
    =constituido por= made up of

  =constituy-e, -en= _see_ =constituir=

  =contante= counting;
    =moneda --= ready money, cash

  =contar= count; tell, relate;
    =-- con= depend upon, rely upon, have at one's disposal, possess, enjoy;
    =no -- por nada= count as nothing;
    =sin -- para nada con= without taking any account of

  =contemplar= contemplate

  =contemporáneo, -a= contemporary

  =contener= contain, hold, hold back, restrain, check, stop

  =contentar= content, satisfy, please;
    =--se= be satisfied, be pleased

  =contento, -a= glad, pleased, satisfied;
    =-- de= pleased with

  =contestación= _f._ reply

  =contestar= answer, reply

  =contigo= with you

  =continuar= continue

  =contra= against;
    =atreverse --= dare to oppose;
    =en -- suya= against him;
    =votar en --= vote against it, vote on the other side

  =contradicción= _f._ contradiction;
    =en -- con= in contradiction with, out of touch with

  =contradictorio, -a de= contradictory to

  =contrariar= contradict, oppose, thwart, vex

  =contrario, -a= contrary, opposite;
    =al --= on the contrary;
    =llevar la contraria a= run counter to, oppose

  =contratación= _f._ trade, enterprise;
    =lonja de --= produce exchange

  =contratar= contract, give a position to, engage

  =contribuir= contribute

  =contrincante= _m._ rival, opponent

  =convencer= convince

  =conveniencia= _f._ expedience, utility

  =convenir= suit, be fitting, be proper, be helpful, be good,
    be pleasing, must;
    =conviene ocultarte= we must hide you

  =conversación= _f._ conversation

  =conversador= _m._ conversationalist

  =conversar= converse

  =convertir= convert, change

  =convicción= _f._ conviction

  =convidado= _m._ guest

  =convien-e, -en= _see_ =convenir=

  =conviniera= _see_ =convenir=

  =coquetear= flirt

  =corazón= _m._ heart

  =cordelillo= _m._ (_dim. of_ =cordel=) cord, small rope

  =correr= run, hurry;
    =-- con= take care of, be responsible for;
    =-- tierras= rove over the world;
    =a mi cargo corre= it is my affair or duty;
    =corre de su cuenta= it is at his expense

  =correspondencia= _f._ correspondence, mail

  =corresponder= correspond, respond, reciprocate, return;
    belong, be suitable, be proper, be fitting

  =corriente= current, ordinary

  =corrillo= _m._ (_dim. of_ =corro=) group

  =corte= f. court, retinue, train;
    =Cortes= Parliament, Congress (_Senate and House of Spain_)

  =cortés= courteous

  =cortesano= _m._ courtier

  =cortesía= _f._ courtesy;
    =--s acts= of courtesy, favors

  =corto, -a= short;
    =-- de vista= shortsighted, nearsighted

  =cosa= _f._ thing, matter, object

  =cosmopolita= cosmopolitan

  =costa= _f._ cost, expense

  =costar= cost

  =costilla= _f._ rib

  =costumbre= _f._ custom, habit

  =creación= _f._ creation

  =crear= create, establish;
    =intereses creados= _see page 117_

  =crecer= grow, increase

  =crecimiento= _m._ growth, increase

  =credencial= _f._ credential

  =crédito= _m._ credit, money accredited, note;
    esteem, reputation, confidence;
    =carta de --= letter of credit, credential;
    =--s extraordinarios= extraordinary credits;
    =persona de --= person of good character, responsible person;
    =hacer -- a= give credit to

  =creer= believe, think;
    =--= + _inf._ expect;
    =--se en el caso de= think oneself called upon to;
    =¡no creas!= don't you believe it! you mustn't think it!
    =¡ya lo creo!= yes indeed!

  =creyendo= _see_ =creer=

  =creyera= _see_ =creer=

  =creyésemos= _see_ =creer=

  =criada= _f._ servant, maid

  =criado= _m._ servant

  =criar= raise, bring up

  =crimen= _m._ crime

  =crisis= _f._ crisis

  =Crispín= _m._ _see page 119_

  =crítica= _f._ criticism

  =cromo= _m._ chromo

  =crónica= _f._ chronicle;
    =-- de sociedad= society news

  =cronista= _m._ chronicler;
    =-- de salones= society reporter

  =cruel= cruel

  =cuadro= _m._ picture;
    =division= (_of a play_), scene

  =cual= like, as;
    =el, la --, los, las --es= who, which

  =¿cuál?= which? what? which one?

  =cualidad= _f._ quality, good quality

  =cualquier(a)= _adj._ any, any whatever, whatever, any at all;
    =de -- modo= in any case, however, in any fashion, any old way;
    =de -- modo que sea= in whatever manner or however it may be

  =cualquiera= _pron._ anybody, any one, anybody at all;
    whatever, whoever;
    =-- que sea el favorecido= whoever the favored one may be

  =cuando= when;
    =de -- en --= from time to time;
    =de vez en --= from time to time

  =¿cuándo?= when?

  =cuanto, -a= how much, as much, all that, whatever, anything that;
    =--s= how many, as many, all that, whoever;
    =en --= as soon as;
    =en -- a= as for;
    =unos --s= some, certain

  =¿cuánto, -a?= how much?
    =¿--s?= how many?
    =¡-- me alegro!= how glad I am!
    =¡cuántas veces!= how often!

  =cuarenta= forty

  =cuarto= _m._ room

  =cuatro= four

  =cubrir= cover

  =cuello= _m._ neck, throat

  =cuenta= _f._ account, affair;
    bill, note;
    =a mejor --= with better expectations;
    =corre de su --= it is at his expense;
    =pedir --= ask for an account;
    =por tu --= on your own account, for yourself;
    =tomar por su --= take upon oneself, take charge of;
    =tener --= bear in mind;
    =tener en --= take into consideration

  =cuenta= _see_ =contar=

  =cuento= _m._ tale, story;
    =-- de hadas= fairy tale

  =cuesta= _see_ =costar=

  =cuestión= _f._ question

  =cuidado= _m._ care, attention, anxiety;
    =haber --= feel anxiety, worry;
    =pasar --= worry;
    =quedar en --= be anxious;
    =tener --= take care, be careful;
    =tener mucho --= be very careful

  =cuidadoso, -a= careful

  =cuidar= care;
    =-- de= take care of

  =culpa= _f._ fault, blame

  =culpable= guilty;
    =los --s= the guilty persons, the culprits

  =culpar= blame

  =culto, -a= cultivated

  =cultura= _f._ culture, cultivation, refinement

  =cumbre= _f._ summit, prime

  =cumplimiento= _m._ fulfillment, accomplishment

  =cumplir= fulfill, accomplish;
    perform one's duty;
    =-- con= carry out, fulfill;
    =-- los veinte años= reach the age of twenty years

  =curar= cure

  =curia= _f._ tribunal, bar, legal profession;
    =protocolo de --= legal document

  =curiosidad= _f._ curiosity

  =cursi= pretentious, vulgar

  =cursilería= _f._ pretentiousness, vulgarity, piece of vulgarity

  =cuyo, -a= whose


  Ch

  =chafar= rumple, cut short, spite

  =chaleco= _m._ vest;
    =-- de frac= dress vest;
    =-- de fantasía= fancy vest

  =chic= _m._ (_Fr._) style, elegance

  =chifladura= _f._ fancy, whim, notion

  =chiquillo= _m._ (_dim. of_ =chico=) boy, little boy;
    =--s= little children

  =¡chist!= hush! sh!

  =¡chito!= hush! sh!

  =¡chits!= hush! sh!

  =chochear= dote, be in one's dotage


  D

  =daca= (=da + acá=) give here;
    =toma y --= give and take

  =dama= _f._ lady

  =danzar= dance

  =dañino, -a= harmful, injurious;
    =viejo --= old trouble maker

  =dar= give, attribute;
    cause, excite;
    take;
    inflict, hit, strike;
    =-- armas a= give arms to, give a handle to, play into the hands of;
    =-- la batalla= start the battle or struggle, cast the die;
    =-- con= come upon, find;
    =-- con nosotros en= put us in;
    =-- a conocer= let know, make understand, show;
    =-- en= fall upon, chance upon;
    take a notion to, happen to;
    =-- un estirón= take a sudden start in growth, shoot up suddenly;
    =-- frente= a face;
    =-- guerra= cause trouble;
    =-- lugar a= give rise to, cause, give an opportunity to;
    =-- muerte a= kill;
    =-- su parte a give= (_something_) its due, recognize the
    importance of (_something_);
    =-- un paso= take a step;
    =-- de plano= strike directly, hit squarely;
    =-- tregua a= give a rest to, stop using;
    =--se aires= put on airs;
    =da la casualidad= chance has it, it happens by chance;
    =me da una lástima= it makes me feel sorry;
    =lo mismo da= it's all the same, it makes no difference;
    =¿qué le dio?= what struck him? what's the matter with him?

  =Dario= _see page 93, note 2_

  =de= of, from, by, with, in, at, to, than;
    _for meanings of numerous phrases and expressions containing =de=
    see Notes and other headings in this vocabulary_

  =debajo de= under, beneath

  =deber= _m._ duty;
    _see below_

  =deber= owe;
    be obliged to, be about to, be (destined) to, have to, must, ought;
    =-- de= must: _see above_

  =debidamente= justly, duly, properly, in due form

  =debido, -a= due, rightful, proper

  =débil= weak

  =debilidad= _f._ weakness

  =decidir= decide, settle;
    =-- de= decide, determine;
    =--se a= decide to

  =decir= say, tell;
    =-- (muy) bien= speak (very) sensibly;
    =es --= that is to say;
    =-- que no= say or tell no;
    =querer --= mean;
    =--se perjudicado= call oneself injured;
    =digo= I mean;
    =no digas= don't contradict;
    =¡no se diga!= there's no denying it, there's no use talking!
    =no dirás= you can't say

  =declarar= declare

  =decoro= _m._ decorum, propriety

  =dedicar= dedicate

  =dediqué= _see_ =dedicar=

  =dedo= _m._ finger

  =defectillo= _m._ (_dim. of_ =defecto=) slight fault, slight
    defect, peccadillo

  =defecto= _m._ defect, fault

  =defender= defend, support

  =defiend-o, -e= _see_ =defender=

  =dejar= leave, abandon, put down;
    let, allow;
    cease, stop;
    =-- mal= disappoint;
    =-- de= cease, stop;
    fail;
    =--se de= cease, stop;
    =dejadnos de= spare us

  =delante= in front

  =delicadeza= _f._ delicacy, refinement;
    =--s= refinements, delicacy

  =delicado, -a= delicate

  =delincuente= delinquent, guilty

  =delito= _m._ fault, crime

  =demanda= _f._ demand, request;
    =en -- de= calling for

  =demarcar= mark out, define

  =demás= rest, other;
    =los --= the rest, the others, others

  =demasiado= too, too much, more than enough

  =demonio= _m._ demon

  =demora= _f._ delay

  =dentro= inside, within

  =deponer= depose, give testimony

  =depositar= deposit

  =depósito= _m._ deposit

  =derecho= _m._ right, law;
    fee;
    =--s de justicia= court fees

  =derecho, -a= right;
    =a la derecha=, =la primera derecha=, =la segunda derecha=
    _see page 39, note 1_

  =desabrido, -a= insipid, sour, sharp, short

  =desagradable= disagreeable

  =desagradar= displease, offend

  =desahogo= _m._ unbosoming, freedom, frankness

  =desairado, -a= graceless

  =desaire= _m._ slight, rebuff, awkwardness, unpleasantness

  =desaparecer= disappear

  =desarrollar= develop;
    =--se= be developed, develop

  =desarrugar= unwrinkle, smooth out

  =desatento, -a= rude, impolite

  =descanso= _m._ rest, repose

  =descargar= discharge, administer, strike (_a blow_)

  =descargues= _see_ =descargar=

  =descender= descend

  =desciende= _see_ =descender=

  =descolgar= unhang, take down;
    =--se con= come out with

  =descolorido, -a= discolored

  =descomedido, -a= immoderate, rude

  =descomponer= disarrange, break off

  =descompuesto= _see_ =descomponer=

  =desconfiado, -a= distrustful

  =desconfianza= _f._ distrust, mistrust

  =desconocer= fail to recognize

  =desconozco= _see_ =desconocer=

  =desconsiderado, -a= inconsiderate, thoughtless

  =descorrer= draw (_a curtain_)

  =descortesía= _f._ discourtesy

  =descosido= _m._ rip, tear

  =descripción= _f._ description

  =descubierto= _see_ =descubrir=

  =descubrir= discover, disclose, unmask, find out;
    =a lo que se descubre= as far as we can see

  =descuelga= _see_ =descolgar=

  =descuidado, -a= careless, carefree;
    =ir --= go without worrying, not worry

  =descuidar= make oneself easy, not worry;
    =--se= be careless or negligent

  =desde= _prep._ since, from;
    =-- ahora= from now on;
    =-- hoy= from this day on, from now on;
    =-- que= _conj._ since

  =desdeñar= disdain, scorn

  =desdicha= _f._ misfortune

  =desdichado, -a= unfortunate, unhappy

  =desdoblar= unfold

  =desear= desire, wish, want

  =desengaño= _m._ disillusionment

  =deseo= _m._ desire, wish

  =desesperado, -a= desperate, despairing;
    =a la desesperada= desperately, in despair

  =desgraciado, -a= unfortunate, unhappy

  =deshacerse de= free oneself from, get rid of

  =desheredar= disinherit

  =desistir= desist, refrain;
    =el -- de tu dimisión= the abandonment of your resignation

  =deslucido, -a= tarnished, impaired;
    _see_ =deslucir=

  =deslucir= discredit, bring discredit;
    =-- con el mundo= bring discredit in the eyes of the world;
    _see_ =deslucido=

  =deslumbrar= dazzle

  =desmayado, -a= fainted away, fainting, unconscious

  =desoír= not heed;
    =--se= be unheeded

  =desoyeron= _see_ =desoír=

  =despacio= slowly;
    =más --= later, at greater leisure

  =despacho= _m._ office

  =despedir= dismiss, send off;
    =--se take= leave, say good-by;
    =--se de= take leave of, say good-by to

  =despejar= clear, clear away

  =despertar= awaken;
    _n._ awakening

  =despida= _see_ =despedir=

  =despreciable= despicable, contemptible;
    =¡--!= contemptible fellow!

  =despreciar= despise

  =desprenderse de= dispossess oneself of, give up, get rid of

  =despreocupado, -a= easy, unconventional

  =después= _adv._ afterwards, then, next;
    =-- de= _prep._ after;
    =-- de todo= after all

  =desquitarse= retaliate, take revenge, get even

  =destemplanza= _f._ immoderation, excess

  =destinar= destine, intend, mean

  =destino= _m._ destiny, fate

  =destreza= _f._ skill, dexterity

  =destrozar= destroy, break

  =destrucción= _f._ =destruction=

  =desvelado, -a= wakeful

  =desvergonzada= _f._ shameless girl

  =desvergonzado= _m._ shameless fellow

  =desvergüenza= _f._ shamelessness

  =desvivirse= outdo oneself, desire anxiously

  =detalle= _m._ detail

  =detendrá= _see_ =detener=

  =detiene= _see_ =detener=

  =detener= stop;
    =--se= stop

  =determinar= determine, fix

  =detrás= _adv._ behind;
    =-- de= _prep._ behind

  =di= (_imper._) _see_ =decir=

  =d-i, -iste, -ió, -ieron= _see_ =dar=

  =día= _m._ day;
    =al -- siguiente= on the following day;
    =en estos --s= in these days, at the present time

  =diablo= _m._ devil

  =diamante= _m._ diamond

  =diario, -a= daily

  =diatriba= _f._ diatribe

  =diccionario= _m._ dictionary

  =dic-es, -e, -en= _see_ =decir=

  =diciembre= _m._ December

  =diciendo= _see_ =decir=

  =dicha= _f._ happiness

  =dicho= _m._ saying

  =dicho, -a= said, the said;
    =--s= the same (_characters who remain on the stage
    for two or more scenes_)

  =dicho= _see_ =decir=

  =dichoso, -a= happy, fortunate;
    blessed (_ironical_)

  =diente= _m._ tooth

  =dieron= _see_ =dar=

  =diez= ten

  =diferencia= _f._ difference

  =difícil= difficult, hard

  =dificultad= _f._ difficulty

  =dig-as, -a, -áis= _see_ =decir=

  =dignarse= deign, condescend

  =dignidad= _f._ dignity

  =digno, -a= worthy

  =digo= _see_ =decir=

  =dij-e, -iste, -o, -eron= _see_ =decir=

  =dile= (=di= [_from_ =decir=] + =le=)

  =dilucidar= elucidate, explain

  =dime= (=di= [_from_ =decir=] + =me=)

  =dimisión= _f._ resignation

  =dimitir= resign

  =dineral= _m._ large sum of money, fortune

  =dinero= _m._ money

  =dio= _see_ =dar=

  =diputado= _m._ deputy

  =dir-é, -ás, -á, -éis, -án= _see_ =decir=

  =dirección= _f._ direction, tendency

  =directo, -a= direct

  =dir-ía, -íais, -ían= _see_ =decir=

  =dirigir= direct, guide;
    =--la palabra a= address;
    =--se= direct one's steps, go towards

  =discreción= _f._ discretion, prudence

  =discreto, -a= discreet, considerate, ingenious;
    =andar --= be considerate

  =discurrir= reflect, reason

  =discurso= _m._ speech

  =discutir= discuss

  =disfrutar de= enjoy

  =disgustar= displease

  =disgusto= _m._ displeasure, offense, slight, annoyance

  =disimular= conceal

  =disparatado, -a= absurd, silly, mad

  =disparate= _m._ nonsense, absurdity

  =disparo= _m._ firing, discharge (_of guns_)

  =disponer= arrange, settle;
    =-- de= dispose of;
    =--se a= prepare to, get ready to

  =disponga= _see_ =disponer=

  =dispuesto, -a= prepared, ready

  =diste= _see_ =dar=

  =distingo= _see_ =distinguir=

  =distinguir= distinguish, esteem, recognize

  =distinto, -a= distinct, different, distinguished

  =distraer= distract;
    =--se= obtain distraction

  =distrajo= _see_ =distraer=

  =ditirambo= _m._ dithyramb

  =diverso, -a= diverse, different

  =divertido, -a= amusing;
    _see_ =divertir=

  =divertir= amuse;
    =--se= amuse oneself, have a good time;
    _see_ =divertido=

  =divierte= _see_ =divertir=

  =divino, -a= divine

  =doce= twelve

  =docena= _f._ dozen

  =docto, -a= learned

  =doctor= _m._ doctor;
    =-- jurista= doctor of law

  =doctrina= _f._ doctrine

  =doler= hurt, ache;
    =--se de= regret, be sorry for;
    _see_ =doliente=

  =doliente= suffering;
    =hacerse del --= pretend to be suffering;
    _see_ =doler=

  =dolo= _m._ fraud, trickery

  =dominar= dominate, prevail

  =Don= Mr. _usually not translated_ (_used before Christian name_)

  =donación= _f._ donation

  =donaire= _m._ grace, elegance, witticism

  =doncella= _f._ girl, maiden;
    servant, maid

  =donde= where;
    =hasta --= as far as

  =¿dónde?= where?
    =¿de --?= from where? whence?
    =¿hasta --?= how far?

  =Doña= Mrs.; _usually not translated_ (_used before Christian name_)

  =dos= two;
    =los --= the two, both

  =doscientos, -as= two hundred

  =dosel= _m._ canopy

  =dotar= portion, endow, give a dowry to

  =dote= _f._ dowry

  =doy= _see_ =dar=

  =drama= _m._ drama

  =dramático, -a= dramatic

  =duda= _f._ doubt;
    =sin -- alguna= without any doubt

  =dudar= doubt;
    =-- de= doubt;
    =-- en= hesitate to

  =dueño= _m._ master

  =dulce= sweet, soft, gentle

  =dulcemente= sweetly, softly, gently

  =dulcificar= sweeten, soften

  =dulzura= _f._ sweetness, softness

  =durante= during

  =durar= endure, last

  =duro, -a= hard, harsh, severe


  E

  =e= (_before_ =i= _and_ =hi=) and

  =¡Ea!= oh! (_interj. used to express surprise or to arouse attention_)

  =echar= throw, throw out, dismiss;
    =--lo a broma= make a joke of it;
    =-- encima a= throw over, throw on, throw on top of

  =edad= _f._ age;
    =tener más --= be older

  =edición= _f._ edition

  =educar= educate, bring up;
    =educado= well-bred;
    =mal educado= ill-bred

  =efectivo, -a= effective, real;
    =algo --= something substantial, some cash

  =efecto= _m._ effect

  =eficacia= _f._ efficacy, usefulness

  =eficaz= efficacious, effective

  =¡eh!= eh! here! oh!

  =ejecutoria= _f._ pedigree

  =ejemplar= exemplary

  =ejemplo= _m._ example, instance;
    =por --= for example, for instance

  =ejercicio= _m._ exercise

  =ejército= _m._ army

  =el, la, lo, los, las= the;
    =-- de= the one with;
    =-- que= he who, the one who _or_ which, _etc._;
    who, which, that;
    =-- mío=, =-- tuyo=, _etc._, _see_ =mío=, =tuyo=, _etc._

  =él= he, him, it

  =elegancia= _f._ elegance

  =elegante= elegant, stylish, fetching

  =elegir= elect, choose, select

  =elevado, -a= elevated, lofty, high;
    _see_ =elevar=

  =elevar= elevate, heighten, raise;
    _see_ =elevado=

  =elogiar= eulogize, praise

  =elogio= _m._ eulogy, praise

  =ella= she, her, it

  =ellas= _f._ they, them

  =ello= it

  =ellos= _m._ they, them

  =embajada= _f._ embassy

  =embajador= _m._ ambassador

  =embargar= attach, seize

  =embargo=, =sin= however, yet, nevertheless

  =embobar= amuse, fascinate

  =embrollo= _m._ embroilment, entanglement, confusion

  =embuste= _m._ lie, falsehood, fraud

  =Emilia= _f._ Emily

  =Emiliano= _see page 94, note 3_

  =empanada= _f._ meat pie;
    =-- de gato= cat pie (_in derision_)

  =empañar= tarnish, stain

  =emparentar= become related by marriage

  =empecemos= _see_ =empezar=

  =empeñar= pledge;
    =--se= bind oneself (_to pay a debt_), go into debt;
    =--se en= insist upon, persist in

  =empeño= _m._ eagerness, effort, determination;
    =poner uno todo su --= direct all one's efforts

  =empezar= begin, commence

  =empiece= _see_ =empezar=

  =empiez-a, -an= _see_ =empezar=

  =emplear= employ, use;
    =--se= busy oneself

  =empleo= _m._ employment, calling, office

  =empresario= _m._ (_theatrical_) impresario, manager

  =empujar= push

  =en= in, into, on, upon, at, about, to;
    _for meanings of numerous expressions containing_ =en=
    _see Notes and other headings in this vocabulary_

  =enamoradillo, -a= (_dim. of_ =enamorado, -a=) slightly
    in love, mildly smitten

  =enamorado, -a= enamored, in love, lover;
    =-- de= in love with;
    _see_ =enamorar=

  =enamorar= enamor, inspire love in;
    =--se de= fall in love with

  =encantador= _m._ enchanter, magician

  =encantador, -a= enchanting, charming, delightful

  =encantar= enchant, charm, delight

  =encanto= _m._ enchantment, charm

  =encargo= _m._ order;
    =por -- de= by order of

  =encarnar= take shape

  =encendido, -a= burning, on fire

  =encerrar= shut in

  =encima= _adv._ above, on top;
    =echar -- a= throw over, throw on, throw on top of;
    =-- de= _prep._ on top of, above

  =encomendar= commend, commit, intrust

  =encontrar= meet, find

  =encuentra= _see_ =encontrar=

  =encumbrar= raise, lift

  =endiablado, -a= diabolical, devilish

  =enemigo= _m._ enemy

  =enemigo, -a= hostile

  =enfadar= anger;
    =--se= con get angry at

  =engañar= deceive, impose upon, cheat;
    =--se= deceive oneself, make a mistake, be wrong

  =engaño= _m._ deceit, deception, mistake

  =enhoramala= in an evil hour;
    =cásense --= let them marry, bad luck to them

  =enojar= annoy, vex, anger;
    =--se= be vexed, get angry

  =enojoso, -a= annoying, irritating

  =enorgullecerse= swell (up) with pride, feel proud

  =enorme= enormous, huge

  =enredo= _m._ entanglement, trick, plot

  =ensanchar= broaden, widen

  =enseñanza= _f._ teaching

  =enseñar= teach, show

  =entender= understand, believe, conceive;
    =-- en= be in charge of, have a hand in;
    =--se= understand each other _or_ one another, come to an understanding

  =entendimiento= _m._ intelligence, comprehension, intellect

  =enterar= inform, acquaint;
    =--se= find out;
    =--se de que= find out that;
    =ya estás enterado= now you know

  =entero, -a= entire, whole;
    =por --= entirely

  =entiend-o, -es= _see_ =entender=

  =entonces= then, at that time;
    =de --= of _or_ belonging to that time

  =entrada= _f._ entry, entrance

  =entrar= enter, go in;
    =--se= enter

  =entre= between, among, in the midst of

  =entregar= give, hand, deliver, give up

  =entretanto= meanwhile

  =entrevista= _f._ interview

  =entristecer= sadden

  =entusiasmado, -a= filled with enthusiasm, enthusiastic

  =entusiasmo= _m._ enthusiasm

  =enumerar= enumerate

  =envejecer= grow old

  =enviar= send

  =envidia= _f._ envy;
    =tener -- a= be envious _or_ jealous of

  =envidiar= envy

  =envío= _m._ sending, shipment

  =enviudar= become a widower _or_ widow

  =envolver= envelop

  =epitalamio= _m._ epithalamium, marriage song

  =época= _f._ epoch, age

  =equidad= _f._ equity

  =equitas= (_Lat._) _see page 100, note 2_

  =equivocación= _f._ mistake

  =equivocar= mistake;
    =--se= be mistaken;
    =sigues equivocado= you are still mistaken

  =er-a, -as, -an= _see_ =ser=

  =eres= _see_ =ser=

  =errante= wandering, vagabond

  =error= _m._ error, mistake

  =es= _see_ =ser=

  =escalera= _f._ stairs, stairway;
    =-- de servicio= back stairs

  =escalón= _m._ step (_of a stair_), stepping-stone

  =escapar= escape

  =escarmentar= take warning, give warning, admonish

  =escena= _f._ scene, stage

  =escisión= _f._ division

  =escoger= choose, select

  =escoltar= escort, conduct

  =esconder= hide;
    =--se= hide

  =escote= _m._ décolleté, low-neck dress

  =escribir= write

  =escrito= _see_ =escribir=

  =escritor= _m._ writer

  =escrúpulo= _m._ scruple

  =escrupuloso, -a= scrupulous;
    =de puro --= out of pure scrupulousness _or_ conscientiousness

  =escuchar= listen, listen to

  =escudo= _m._ crown (_a coin no longer in use_)

  =escuela= _f._ school

  =ese, esa= that;
    =esos, esas= those;
    =por esos mares= on the high seas

  =ése, ésa, eso=, that one, that;
    =ésos, ésas=, those;
    =¡eso, eso!= just that! exactly so!
    =eso es= that's it;
    =¿no es eso?= isn't that so?
    =si eso fuera= if that were the case;
    =¡eso no!= not that!
    =por eso= therefore, for that reason;
    =por eso mismo=, for that very reason;
    =eso que= although, even though;
    =eso sí= yes indeed;
    =eso sí que no= certainly not that;
    =llegar a eso= come to that, go so far

  =esencial= essential, necessary

  =esfuerzo= _m._ effort, exertion, spirit

  =eso= _see_ =ése=

  =espacioso, -a= spacious

  =espada= _f._ sword

  =espadachín= _m._ (swaggering) swordsman, bully, ruffian, bravo

  =espalda= _f._ back, shoulder

  =espantar= frighten;
    =--se= be frightened _or_ startled, take fright

  =España= _f._ Spain

  =español= _m._ Spaniard

  =español, -a= Spanish;
    =el --= Spanish (_the language_)

  =especialidad= _f._ special quality, specialty

  =especialmente= especially

  =espectáculo= _m._ spectacle

  =espera= _f._ wait, waiting, expectation;

   =en -- de= in expectation of, in the hope of

  =esperanza= _f._ hope

  =esperar= hope, expect, await, wait

  =espetado, -a= stiff, haughty, majestic

  =espíritu= _m._ spirit, heart, soul, mind

  =espiritual= spiritual

  =esplendidez= _f._ splendor

  =espléndido, -a= splendid

  =esposa= _f._ wife

  =esposo= _m._ husband

  =est= (_Lat._) _see page 100, note 2_

  =estado= _m._ state, estate, position

  =estafermo= _m._ loiterer, idler, graven image

  =estar= be;
    =-- de acuerdo= be agreed, agree;
    =-- sin blanca= be penniless;
    =-- conforme con= agree with;
    =-- de más= be in the way _or_ objectionable;
    =-- para= be about to, be in a position to _or_ for;
    =-- para burlas= be in a mood for jokes;
    =-- por= be inclined toward, have a liking for;
    =-- a punto de= be on the point of;
    =-- en su punto= be at its height;
    =-- de visita= be paying a visit, be calling;
    =--se= stand, stay;
    =bien os está por= you're in a fine fix for

  =este, esta= this;
    =estos, estas= these

  =éste, ésta, esto=, this one, this;
    =éstos, éstas=, these;
    =los fines de éste [estudio]= the purposes thereof;
    =esto es= this is _or_ that is;
    =esto otro= this other thing

  =estético, -a= aesthetic

  =estilo= _m._ style

  =estimación= _f._ (high) estimation, esteem

  =estimar= esteem, value;
    =--se en= value oneself at

  =estipendio= _m._ stipend

  =estirón= _m._ strong pull;
    rapid growth;
    =dar un --= take a sudden start in growth, shoot up suddenly

  =estirpe= _f._ race, stock, lineage

  =estival= of summer, relating to the summer, summer...

  =esto= _see_ =éste=

  =estofa= _f._ quality, condition

  =estofado, -a= stewed

  =estorbar= impede, disturb, obstruct

  =estorbo= _m._ obstruction

  =estoy= _see_ =estar=

  =estrambote= _m._ _a tag of two or more verses appended to a
    sonnet for humorous or graceful effect_

  =estratagema= _f._ stratagem, trick

  =estrechez= _f._ poverty

  =estrella= _f._ star

  =estrenar= present for the first time (_used especially
    of a theatrical performance_)

  =estudiante= _m._ student

  =estudiar= study, consider

  =estudio= _m._ study

  =estuv-iera, -iéramos= _see_ =estar=

  =estuv-iste, -o, -ieron= _see_ =estar=

  =eternidad= _f._ eternity

  =eterno, -a= eternal

  =europeo, -a= European

  =evidencia= _f._ evidence;
    =poner en --= make clear, make known, demonstrate, set forth

  =evidente= evident

  =evitar= avoid, escape

  =exacto, -a= exact, precise, accurate

  =exagerar= exaggerate

  =exaltación= _f._ exaltation, fervor

  =exceder= exceed, surpass

  =excelente= excellent

  =excelso, -a= elevated, lofty

  =excepcional= exceptional

  =exceso= _m._ excess;
    =por --= through or by excess

  =exclusión= _f._ exclusion

  =exclusivamente= exclusively

  =excusar= excuse, avoid

  =exigir= exact, require, demand

  =existencia= _f._ existence

  =existir= exist

  =éxito= _m._ success

  =experiencia= _f._ experience

  =experto -a= expert

  =explicar= explain;
    =--se= understand

  =exponer= expose, show, disclose;
    =es expuesto= that's evident

  =expongo= _see_ =exponer=

  =expositivo, -a= explanatory

  =expresar= express

  =expresión= _f._ expression

  =expresivo, -a= expressive

  =expuesto= _see_ =exponer=

  =expuso= _see_ =exponer=

  =extenso, -a= extensive

  =extrañar= wonder at, be surprised at

  =extraño, -a= strange

  =extraordinario, -a= extraordinary, unusual;
    =créditos --s= extraordinary credits

  =extraviado, -a= gone astray, lost, wayward

  =extremar= carry to an extreme, exaggerate


  F

  =fácil= easy

  =facilitar= facilitate, make easy

  =factura= _f._ bill

  =fachada= _f._ façade, front

  =falda= _f._ skirt

  =falta= _f._ lack, want;
    fault, defect, failing

  =faltar= be deficient, be lacking;
    fail;
    need, lack;
    =-- a= fail to, break, be absent from;
    =no te faltaba más que= you needed only that, the only
    thing you lacked was that

  =fama= _f._ fame, reputation, good name

  =familia= _f._ family

  =famoso, -a= famous, remarkable

  =fantasía= _f._ fantasy, fancy, imagination, caprice;
    =chaleco de --= fancy vest

  =fantoche= _m._ (_from Fr._) marionette

  =farsa= _f._ farce

  =favor= _m._ favor, kindness, help;
    =¡--!= help!

  =favorecer= favor, help;
    =el favorecido= the one favored

  =fe= _f._ faith, confidence;
    =buena --= good faith, honesty

  =felices= _see_ =feliz=

  =felicidad= _f._ happiness

  =feliz= happy

  =femenino, -a= feminine

  =feo, -a= ugly, hideous;
    =¡qué cosa más fea!= what a hideous thing!

  =feria= _f._ fair, carnival

  =Ferioque= _see page 93, note 2_

  =festejar= feast, entertain

  =fiado, -a= en trusting in, relying upon;
    _see_ fiar

  =fiador= _m._ guarantor

  =fianza= _f._ surety, security, bail

  =fiar= trust, guarantee;
    =-- de= trust in, rely upon;
    =-- en= trust in, rely upon;
    =--se a= trust, depend upon;
    =--se de= trust, depend upon;
    =a no -- tanto de= if he did not rely so much upon;
    =no me fío= I have no confidence;
    _see_ =fiado=

  =ficción= _f._ fiction

  =fiel= faithful

  =fiesta= _f._ feast

  =figura= _f._ figure, face

  =figuraos= (=figurad + os=)

  =figurarse= imagine

  =figurín= _m._ fashion plate

  =fijar= fix, fasten;
    =--se= become fixed or stable;
    notice;
    =--se en= fix upon, settle upon;
    notice

  =filosofía= _f._ philosophy

  =fin= _m. and f._ end, aim, object;
    =al --= after all, in short;
    =en --= after all, in short;
    =por --= at last, at length, finally

  =final= _m._ end, conclusion

  =finca= _f._ estate

  =fingimiento= _m._ feigning, simulation, deceit

  =fingir= feign, pretend, dissemble;
    =-- balbuceos= pretend to stammer (_as if speaking like a child_)

  =finura= _f._ fineness, exquisiteness

  =firma= _f._ signature

  =firmar= sign

  =fisonomía= _f._ physiognomy, face

  =flor= _f._ flower

  =florecer= flourish, thrive

  =Florencia= _f._ Florence

  =folio= _m._ folio

  =follaje= _m._ foliage

  =fondo= _m._ bottom, background;
    =conocer a --= know thoroughly

  =foragido= _m._ highwayman, out-law

  =forma= _f._ form

  =formal= formal, regular;
    proper, reliable, serious, real

  =formalidad= _f._ formality

  =formar= form

  =fórmula= _f._ formula

  =foro= _m._ back (_of the stage_)

  =fortalecer= fortify, strengthen

  =fortuna= _f._ fortune, good fortune, chance;
    =hombre de --= soldier of fortune

  =forzar= force, compel

  =forzoso, -a= necessary, obligatory

  =frac= _m._ dress coat;
    =chaleco de --= dress vest

  =francamente= frankly

  =francesa= _f._ Frenchwoman

  =Francia= _f._ France

  =franqueza= _f._ frankness

  =fraude= _m._ fraud, imposture

  =frecuentar= frequent, visit

  =frente= _f._ front;
    forehead, face;
    =dar -- a= face

  =fruta= _f._ fruit;
    _see_ =fruto=

  =fruto= _m._ fruit, result, benefit

  =fue= _see_ =ir= _and_ =ser=

  =fuego= _m._ fire;
    =--s de artificio= fireworks

  =fuera= adv. outside, without;
    =-- la coma= away with the comma;
    =-- de= _prep._ outside, outside of, away from;
    except; unlike, contrary to

  =fu-era, -eras, -éramos= _see_ =ser=

  =fuerte= strong;
    =plaza --= fortress, stronghold

  =fuerte= _adv._ strongly, loudly

  =fuerza= _f._ force, strength, vigor, necessity;
    =--s= forces, strength;
    =ser --= be necessary

  =fu-i, -iste, -é, -imos, -isteis, -eron= _see_ =ser= _and_ =ir=

  =Fulanito= _m._ (_dim. of_ =Fulano=) So-and-so

  =fumar= smoke

  =función= _f._ function, discharge of duty, duty;
    performance (_theatrical_)

  =funeraria= _f._ undertaker's establishment


  G

  =gabán= _m._ overcoat

  =gabinete= _m._ cabinet, parlor, reception room

  =gala= _f._ gala;
    =--s= finery

  =galán= _m._ gallant, courtier, lover

  =galante= _m._ gallant, courtier, lover

  =galante= gallant, polished, courtly;
    =¡qué poco --!= how impolite!

  =galantería= _f._ gallantry;
    =--s= gallant remarks, compliments

  =galera= _f._ galley

  =gallina= _f._ hen, chicken

  =gana= _f._ inclination, desire;
    =de muy buena --= very gladly

  =ganar= gain, earn, win;
    =victorias ganadas al turco= victories won over the Turk

  =ganga= _f._ bargain

  =garantía= _f._ guaranty, security

  =gastar= spend

  =gasto= _m._ expense;
    =hacer --= incur expense

  =gato= _m._ cat;
    =empanada de --= cat pie (_in derision_)

  =generación= _f._ generation

  =general= general, common, usual

  =generalmente= generally, in general

  =género= _m._ kind, variety, class

  =generosidad= _f._ generosity

  =generoso, -a= generous

  =genio= _m._ nature, character, genius

  =gente= _f._ people;
    =--s= people

  =gentecilla= _f._ (_dim. of_ =gente=) shabby people, people
   (_in contemptuous sense_);
    =-- de poco más o menos= people of little account

  =gentil= genteel, elegant, exquisite

  =gentileza= _f._ elegance, politeness

  =gira= _f._ turn, turn of expression

  =gloria= _f._ glory;
    =tenerlo a --= consider it a great honor

  =glorioso, -a= glorious

  =gobernar= govern

  =gobiernan= _see_ =gobernar=

  =gobierno= _m._ government

  =golpe= _m._ blow;
    =empezar a --s= begin to deal blows

  =golpear= beat, strike;
    =el golpeado= the one struck, the person struck

  =Gómez= _no English equivalent_

  =González= _no English equivalent_

  =gozar de= enjoy

  =grabar= engrave

  =gracia= _f._ grace, elegance, graciousness, courtesy, joke;
    =--s= also thanks, thank you

  =gracioso, -a= gracious, pleasing, funny

  =grado= _m._ grade, degree;
    =en el mayor -- posible= to the greatest possible degree

  =gramatical= grammatical

  =grande= _m._ great person, grandee

  =grande= great, large, big;
    =los --s= the great

  =grandeza= _f._ greatness

  =gratitud= _f._ gratitude

  =grave= grave, serious, weighty;
    =el --= the serious man

  =gravedad= _f._ gravity, seriousness, weightiness

  =gravemente= gravely, seriously

  =gris= gray

  =gritar= cry, shout

  =grosería= _f._ grossness, discourtesy

  =grosero, -a= coarse

  =grotesco, -a= grotesque

  =grupo= _m._ group

  =guapo, -a= pretty, elegant

  =guardar= guard, protect, keep;
    =-- respeto= show respect

  =guerra= _f._ war;
    =dar --= cause trouble

  =guiñolesco, -a= pertaining to =guiñol=, _see page 40, note 3_

  =gustar= please, like, enjoy;
    =le gusta= he likes;
    =-- de= be fond of, like, enjoy

  =gusto= _m._ taste, pleasure, choice;
    =con --= gladly;
    =a su --= to his own taste, according to his own pleasure;
    =por tu --= by your own choice

  =gustoso, -a= pleasing, joyful, willing


  H

  =h-a, -as, -an= _see_ =haber=

  =haber= have; _impers._ be:
    =hay= there is, there are;
    =había= there was, there were, _etc._;
    =no hay para= there is no reason to;
    =-- que= be necessary to;
    =hay que= it is necessary to _etc._;
    =no hay que= (you) mustn't;
    =haber cuidado= worry;
    =-- de= be about to, need to, have to, be bound to,
    must, shall, will, _etc._;
    =he de= I am to, must, _etc._;
    =-- menester= have need, need;
    =-- temor= be afraid, fear;
    =ha más de un mes= more than a month ago

  =habilidad= _f._ ability

  =habitación= _f._ room

  =habla= _f._ speech

  =hablar= speak, talk;
    =el --= speaking;
    _see_ =razón=

  =habr-é, -á, -éis, -án= _see_ =haber=

  =haceos= (=haced= + =os=)

  =hacer= do, make, cause, produce; take;
    =--= + _inf._ cause, make, have, let;
    =-- asiento= make a stop _or_ halt;
    =-- muy bien en= do very well to;
    =-- caso= care;
    =-- caso a= pay attention to (_a person_);
    =-- causa con= make common cause with, join;
    =-- crédito a= give credit to;
    =-- gasto= incur expense;
    =-- (la) merced de= be kind enough to, please;
    =-- mérito de= make a parade of;
    =-- que= bring it about that, cause, have;
    =--se= be made, take place, become;
    =--se de= pretend to be;
    =¡buena la hicisteis!= that's a fine thing you've done!
    =no -- más que= do no more than, only to;
    =no hace más que sonar el timbre= the bell does nothing but ring,
    the bell is ringing all the time;
    =hace mucho tiempo= long ago;
    =no hará tanto que esperan= they cannot have been waiting so long;
    =veinte años hace= twenty years ago

  =hacia= towards; about;
    =-- arriba= upward

  =hacienda= _f._ estate, property, fortune;
    _prop. n._ Treasury;
    =ministra de --= ministress of the Treasury

  =hada= _f._ fairy;
    =cuento de --s= fairy tale

  =hag-a, -as, -áis, -an= _see_ =hacer=

  =hago= _see_ =hacer=

  =halagar= flatter

  =hallar= find;
    =--se= find oneself, be

  =hambre= _f._ hunger

  =hampón= _m._ rowdy, bully

  =han= _see_ =haber=

  =har-é, -ás, -á, -emos, -éis= _see_ =hacer=

  =haría= _see_ =hacer=

  =harto= enough, sufficiently, quite, very, very much

  =has= _see_ =haber=

  =hasta= _prep._ up to, until, as far as;
    =-- ahora= until now; we'll see you again presently;
    =-- donde= as far as;
    =¿-- donde?= how far?
    _adv._ even

  =hatillo= _m._ (_dim. of_ =hato=) small bundle

  =hay= _see_ =haber=

  =hay-a, -as, -áis, -an=, _see_ =haber=

  =hazaña= _f._ deed, feat

  =he= _see_ =haber=

  =he aquí= behold, here is

  =hecho= _m._ fact

  =hecho= _see_ =hacer=

  =hemos= _see_ =haber=

  =heredar= inherit

  =herida= _f._ wound

  =herido, -a= wounded, hurt

  =hermana= _f._ sister

  =hermoso, -a= beautiful, handsome

  =hermosura= _f._ beauty

  =Hernández= _no English equivalent_

  =héroe= _m._ hero

  =heroico, -a= heroic

  =hervir= boil, seethe

  =hic-e, -iste, -imos, -isteis, -ieron= _see_ =hacer=

  =hicieras= _see_ =hacer=

  =hija= _f._ daughter

  =hijo= _m._ son;
    =--s= sons and daughters, offspring, children

  =hilo= _m._ thread

  =hirviente= boiling;
    _see_ =hervir=

  =hispánico, -a= Hispanic

  =hispano, -a= Spanish

  =Hispano-América= _f._ Spanish America

  =hispano-americano, -a= Spanish-American

  =historia= _f._ history, story

  =histórico, -a= historical

  =hizo= _see_ =hacer=

  =¡hola!= hallo!

  =hombre= _m._ man;
    =-- de fortuna= soldier of fortune;
    =-- de mundo= man of the world;
    =todo un --= a grown man

  =honor= _m._ honor

  =honrado, -a= honest, honorable

  =hora= _f._ hour, time;
    =es -- de que= it is time that;
    =a estas --s= at this time, now;
    =en media --= in half an hour;
    =a todas --s= all the time;
    =--s y --s= for hours and hours, for hours on end

  =horca= _f._ gallows;
    =carne de --= gallows bird

  =horrible= horrible

  =¡horror!= horrors!

  =hospedar= lodge;
    =--se= take lodgings, lodge, stop

  =hospedería= _f._ hostelry, inn, hotel

  =hospital= _m._ hospital, asylum

  =hostelero= _m._ innkeeper

  =hostería= _f._ hostelry, inn, hotel

  =hoy= to-day;
    =desde --= from this day on, from now on;
    =sólo de -- le conozco= I met him only to-day

  =hub-e, -o= _see_ =haber=

  =hub-iera, -ieras, -iéramos, -ierais= _see_ =haber=

  =huida= _f._ flight, escape, way of escape

  =huir= flee, run away

  =humanidad= _f._ humanity

  =humanitario, -a= humanitarian

  =humano, -a= human;
    =los --s= human beings, men

  =humilde= humble;
    =los --s= the humble, the lowly

  =humillar= humble

  =humo= _m._ smoke

  =humor= _m._ humor, temper, disposition;
    =de buen --= good-natured;
    =poner de mal --= put into a bad humor

  =humorada= _f._ whim, fancy

  =hurtar= steal

  =hurto= _m._ theft, petty larceny

  =huyamos= _see_ =huir=

  =huye= _see_ =huir=

  =huyéramos= _see_ =huir=

  =huyó= _see_ =huir=


  I

  =iba= _see_ =ir=

  =idea= _f._ idea

  =ideal= _m._ ideal

  =ideal= ideal;
    =el --= the ideal

  =idealismo= _m._ idealism;
    =-s ideal= thoughts

  =idealista= _m._ idealist

  =idear= conceive, contrive, plan

  =ídem= the same

  =idioma= _m._ language

  =ignorante= ignorant

  =ignorar= be ignorant of

  =ilusión= _f._ illusion

  =ilusionar= entrance, fascinate, carry away

  =ilustrar= illustrate, ennoble

  =ilustre= illustrious

  =imaginario, -a= imaginary

  =impedir= hinder, prevent

  =impertinencia= _f._ impertinence, impertinent thing;
    =decir --s= make impertinent remarks;
    =una= _or_ =alguna --= something impertinent

  =impertinente= impertinent

  =impide= _see_ =impedir=

  =impiedad= _f._ impiety, impiousness

  =impondré= _see_ =imponer=

  =imponer (a)= impose (upon), force (upon)

  =importancia= _f._ importance

  =importante= important

  =importar= be of importance, concern, matter;
    =te importa más= it is more important to you;
    =nada importa= it makes no difference;
    =nada me importa de= I don't care about anything
    =no me importa= I don't care

  =importunar= trouble, bother

  =imposible= impossible

  =impostor= _m._ impostor

  =imprevisto, -a= unforeseen;
    =--s= unforeseen expenses

  =impropio, -a de= unbefitting

  =improvisar= improvise, make up

  =improviso, -a= unexpected;
    =de --= unexpectedly, suddenly

  =imprudente= imprudent;
    =¡--!= rash man!

  =impuesto= _see_ =imponer=

  =impune= unpunished, with impunity

  =impureza= _f._ impurity

  =inapreciable= inestimable

  =incapaces= _see_ =incapaz=

  =incapaz= incapable

  =incesante= incessant

  =incivil= uncivil, impolite

  =inclinar=, incline, dispose

  =incógnita= _f._ unknown quantity

  =incomodar= disturb, trouble

  =incomparable= incomparable

  =inconveniente= _m._ drawback, obstacle, difficulty

  =increíble= incredible

  =incurable= incurable

  =indecoroso, -a= indecorous, unbecoming

  =indicar= indicate, show, point out

  =indiferente= indifferent

  =indignación= _f._ indignation

  =indignidad= _f._ indignity

  =indigno, -a= unworthy

  =indisponer= disarrange

  =indispuesto, -a= indisposed

  =indocto, -a= uneducated, ignorant

  =inefable= ineffable

  =ineficaz= ineffective

  =inepto, -a= inept, unsuitable

  =infeliz= unfortunate, unhappy;
    =este --= this unfortunate man

  =infierno= _m._ inferno, hell

  =infinito, -a= infinite

  =inflexibilidad= _f._ inflexibility

  =influencia= _f._ influence

  =informar= inform

  =ingenio= _m._ genius, talent, mind, brains, cleverness

  =ingenuo, -a= ingenuous, simple

  =inglés, -esa= English

  =iniciar= begin

  =injuria= (_Lat._) _see page 93, note 1_

  =injusto, -a= unjust, unfair

  =inmensamente= immensely

  =inmortal= immortal

  =innovación= _f._ innovation

  =inocencia= _f._ innocence

  =inocente= innocent

  =inquieto, -a= restless, uneasy, anxious

  =insigne= notable, famous

  =insistir= insist

  =insolencia= _f._ insolence

  =insolente= insolent;
    =¡--!= insolent fellow!

  =insoportable= insupportable, intolerable

  =insostenible= unsustainable, indefensible

  =inspirar= inspire

  =instalar= install

  =instante= _m._ instant, moment

  =insulto= _m._ insult

  =insustituible= indispensable

  =inteligencia= _f._ understanding

  =intención= _f._ intention, intent

  =intensidad= _f._ intensity

  =intensificar= intensify

  =intentar= attempt, try, tend

  =interés= _m._ interest, gain, advantage;
    interest (_monetary_);
    =--es creados= _see page_ 117

  =interesante= interesting

  =interesar= interest

  =ínterin= _m._ interim, meantime

  =interponer= interpose

  =interpongo= _see_ =interponer=

  =interpretar= interpret

  =intervengo= _see_ =intervenir=

  =intervenir= intervene, interfere

  =intimidad= _f._ intimacy

  =intimidar= intimidate, daunt

  =intriga= _f._ intrigue

  =intrigante= _m. or f._ intriguer

  =introducción= _f._ introduction

  =inútil= useless

  =invención= _f._ invention

  =inventario= _m._ inventory

  =invitar= invite

  =ir= go, proceed, go on, continue;
    =--= + _pres. part._ go on, be;
    =--= + _past part._ be;
    =-- a= be going to, go and;
    =-- a buscar= go to seek, go for;
    =-- a ver= go to see, visit;
    =-- y venir= come and go, go to and fro;
    =-- de veras= be serious;
    =--se= go away;
    =¿quién va?= who's there?
    =¡vamos!= come! well! oh!
    =¡vamos a ver!= let's see!
    =¡vaya!= come! well! oh!
    =no vayas a decir= don't go and say

  =ironía= _f._ irony

  =irrevocable= irrevocable

  =italiano=, =-a= Italian

  =izquierdo, -a= left;
    =la primera izquierda, la segunda izquierda=
    _see page 39, note 2_


  J

  =¡ja, ja, ja!= ha, ha, ha!

  =jactancioso, -a= boastful, vainglorious

  =japonés, -esa= Japanese

  =jardín= _m._ garden

  =jefe= _m._ chief, leader

  =joroba= _f._ hump, deformity, defect

  =joven= _m._ young man, youth

  =joven= _f._ young woman, girl

  =joven= young

  =joya= _f._ jewel

  =judío, -a= Jewish

  =juego= _m._ game, play;
    =poner en --= put into play

  =jugar= play

  =juicio= _m._ judgment, senses, opinion

  =juntar= join, unite, bring together

  =junto, -a= united, together;
    =--s= together;
    =-- con= in company with, along with, with

  =junto a= _prep._ next to, close to, near

  =juramento= _m._ oath, vow

  =jurar= swear

  =jurisprudencia= _f._ jurisprudence

  =jurista= _m._ jurist, lawyer;
    =doctor --= doctor of law

  =jus= (_Lat._) _see page 93, note 1_

  =justicia= _f._ justice;
    =tomarse -- por su mano= take the law into one's own hands

  =justicia= (_Lat._) _see page 100, note 2_

  =Justiniano= Justinian _see page 94, note 3_

  =justo, -a= just

  =juventud= _f._ youth, youthfulness

  =juzgar= judge


  L

  =la= _f._ the;
    =-- de= that of;
    =-- de González= Mrs. _or_ Madam González

  =la= her, to her, it

  =labio= _m._ lip

  =labor= _m._ labor, work

  =lado= _m._ side, direction;
    =del otro --= on the other side;
    =cada uno por su --= each one in his own way

  =lágrima= _f._ tear

  =lamentar= lament;
    =--se= lament;
    =--se de= bewail, complain of, regret

  =Lara= (=Teatro=) _see page 117_

  =largo, -a= long;
    =poner de --= put long dresses on

  =largueza= _f._ liberality

  =las= the;
    =-- de= those of

  =las= them

  =lástima= _f._ pity;
    =me da una --= it makes me feel sorry

  =Laura= _f._ Laura

  =lazo= _m._ bond, tie

  =le= him, it, you;
    to him, to her, to it, to you

  =leal= loyal, faithful;
    =ser de los --es= be among the faithful

  =lealtad= _f._ loyalty

  =Leandro= _m._ Leander

  =lectura= _f._ reading

  =leer= read

  =legal= legal

  =legión= _f._ legion, multitude, crowd

  =lejos= far

  =lengua= _f._ tongue, language

  =lenguaje= _m._ language

  =lerdo, -a= slow, stupid

  =les= to them, them

  =letra= _f._ letter

  =letrero= _m._ sign, notice

  =levantar= lift, raise, rouse;
    =--se= rise;
    revolt

  =leve= light

  =ley= _f._ law;
    =oro de --= legal _or_ standard gold

  =leyendo= _see_ leer

  =leyese= _see_ =leer=

  =lexicográfico, -a= lexicographic

  =liberal= liberal

  =libertad= _f._ liberty, freedom;
    =con toda --= in complete freedom

  =libranza= _f._ bill of exchange, draft

  =librar= free, deliver;
    =¡no he librado de mala!= I've had a narrow escape!

  =libre= free

  =licencia= _f._ license, permission;
    =¡con --!= with your permission! by your leave!

  =liebre= _f._ hare;
    =pastel de --= hare pie

  =ligar= bind

  =ligero, -a= slight

  =limitar=, limit

  =límite= _m._ limit

  =limosna= _f._ alms, charity

  =linaje= _m._ lineage, family

  =lindo, -a= pretty, handsome, fine, charming

  =lisonja= _f._ flattery, compliment;
     =--s= pieces of flattery, flattery

  =lisonjero= _m._ flatterer

  =literario=, =-a= literary

  =literatura= _f._ literature

  =lo= him, it;
    one, some, any, so

  =lo= _neuter_ the;
    =-- de= the matter of;
    =-- de siempre= the constant _or_ usual thing;
    =-- que= that which, what;
    =a -- que= according to what, as far as;
    =-- que es= as for;
    =más de -- que= + _verb_ more than;
    =todo -- que= anything that, whatever

  =locamente= madly

  =loco= _m._ lunatic, madman

  =loco=, =-a= crazy, insane;
    =¡loca!= mad girl!

  =locura= _f._ madness, folly

  =lógica= _f._ logic

  =lograr= attain, secure;
    =--= + _inf._ succeed in, manage to

  =logro= _m._ attainment

  =lonja= _f._ exchange;
    =-- de contratación= produce exchange

  =los= the;
    =-- de= those of;
    =-- que= those who, who, whom, which

  =los= them

  =lucido=, =-a= brilliant;
    _see_ =lucir=

  =lucir= display, show off;
    _see_ =lucido=

  =lucha= _f._ struggle

  =luchar= struggle

  =luego= soon, presently, at once;
    then, later

  =lugar= _m._ place, spot;
    cause, motive;
    =dar -- a= give rise to, cause, give an opportunity to

  =Luisa= _f._ Louise

  =Luisita= _f._ (_dim. of Luisa_) little Louise (_it is best to
    retain Spanish name_)

  =lujo= _m._ luxury

  =luminaria= _f._ illumination, festival lights

  =luna= _f._ moon

  =luto= _m._ mourning

  =luz= _f._ light;
    =a la -- de= by the light of;
    =a poca --= by a dim light


  Ll

  =llamar= call, knock;
    =-- la atención= attract attention;
    =-- más la atención= attract greater attention

  =llegar= arrive, come, reach;
    =-- a= come to, reach, come to the point of, succeed in,
    arrive at, attain;
    =-- a eso= come to that, go so far;
    =-- a ser= come to be, become;
    =-- hasta= go so far as to;
    =--se= arrive

  =llegue= _see_ =llegar=

  =llenar= fill

  =lleno=, =-a= full, filled

  =llevar= carry, take, bring, conduct, bear;
    collect, charge;
    wear, have, contain;
    persuade, carry away (_by argument_);
    =--= + _p. p._ have;
    =-- a cabo= bring to completion, bring into effect, carry out;
    =-- la contraria a= run counter to, oppose;
    =-- la dimisión= present one's resignation;
    =-- mejor camino= follow a better course

  =llorar= weep, cry


  M

  =madre= _f._ mother

  =Madrid= _m._ Madrid

  =madrileño, -a= belonging to Madrid, Madrid

  =madrugador= _m._ early riser;
    =ser poco --= not be a very early riser

  =madurez= _f._ maturity

  =maestro= _m._ master

  =magia= _f._ magic

  =magna= (_Lat._) _see page 100, note 2_

  =majadero= _m._ bore, fool, booby

  =mal= _m._ evil, wrong, wickedness

  =mal= _see_ =malo=

  =mal= _adv._ badly, poorly, ill, scarcely, with difficulty;
    =dejar --= disappoint

  =malandrín= _m._ rascal, scoundrel

  =maldad=, _f._ wickedness, evil deed

  =maldiciente= _m._ slanderer, defamer

  =maldiciente= slanderous

  =malgastar= squander, waste

  =malherido, -a= badly wounded

  =malicia= _f._ malice;
    =--s= malicious _or_ shrewd remarks, mischief

  =malicioso, -a= malicious, mischievous

  =mal=(=o=), =-a= bad, wicked;
    =lo --= the trouble;
    =¡no he librado de mala!= I've had a narrow escape!

  =malograr= waste, lose;
    =--lo con= spoil things by

  =maltratar= ill-treat

  =malvado= _m._ wicked man, scoundrel

  =malvender= sell at a loss, sacrifice

  =mamá= _f._ mamma, mother

  =mamarracho= _m._ grotesque figure, absurdity, ridiculous thing

  =mandar= command, order, send

  =manera= _f._ manner, way;
    =de esa --= in that way, so;
    =de esta --= in this way, thus;
    =de -- que= so that

  =manifestación= _f._ manifestation

  =mano= _f._ hand;
    =-- airada= assault and battery;
    =asaltar a -- armada= assault with arms _or_ violence,
    commit assault and battery upon;
    =traer a --= carry by hand;
    =tomarse justicia por su --= take the law into one's own hands

  =mansión= _f._ residence, abode

  =Mantua= _f._ Mantua

  =Manuel= _m._ Manuel

  =mañana= to-morrow;
    =pasado --= the day after to-morrow

  =mar= _m._ sea;
    =por esos --es= on the high seas

  =maravilla= _f._ marvel, wonder

  =maravilloso, -a= marvelous, wonderful

  =marcha= _f._ march, course

  =marido= _m._ husband

  =marrullero= _m._ deceiver, cheat

  =marzo= _m._ March

  =mas= but

  =más= _adj. and adv._ more, most, rather, other, another;
    =los --= the majority;
    =a -- de= in addition to, besides;
    =-- adelante= further on, later;
    =estar de --= be in the way _or_ objectionable;
    =-- bien= rather;
    =no... -- que= only;
    =ni... -- que= nor... except to;
    =un paso --= one step further, another step;
    (=poco=) =-- o menos= more or less, about;

    =por -- que= although, however, however much;
    =¡qué cosa -- fea!= what a hideous thing!
    =sin -- ni --= without further ado;
    =-- tarde= later

  =máscara= _f._ mask

  =masculino, -a= masculine, male

  =matar= kill

  =matrimonio= _m._ matrimony, married couple

  =mayor= greater, greatest

  =mayoría= _f._ majority

  =me= me, to me, myself

  =mediación= _f._ mediation

  =medicina= _f._ medicine

  =medida= _f._ measure, proportion, moderation;
    =sin --= disproportionately

  =medio= _m._ middle, midst;
    measure, way, means;
    =de por --= as an intermediary

  =medio, -a= middle, half;
    =en media hora= in half an hour

  =meditar= meditate

  =mejor= _adj. and adv._ better, best;
    =lo --= the best, the best part, the best thing;
    =aconsejar lo --= give the best advice

  =melancolía= _f._ melancholy, sadness

  =melancólico, -a= melancholy, sad

  =menester= _m._ need;
    =haber --= have need of, need

  =menester= necessary

  =Menganito= _m._ (_dim. of_ =Mengano=) So-and-so

  =menor= lesser, less, least, slightest

  =menos= _adj. and adv._ less, least;
    except;
    =al --= at least;
    =¡-- mal!= that's not so bad!
    =por lo --= at least

  =menospreciar= despise

  =mentar= mention

  =mentir= lie, tell a falsehood

  =mentira= _f._ lie, falsehood

  =mercader= _m._ merchant

  =mercancía= _f._ merchandise

  =merced= _f._ favor, grace;
    =hacer= (=la=) =merced de= be kind enough to, please

  =Merceditas= _f._ (_dim. of_ =Mercedes=) little Mercedes
    (_it is best to retain Spanish name_)

  =merecer= deserve

  =mérito= _m._ merit, worth, excellence;
    =hacer -- de= make a parade of

  =mes= _m._ month

  =mesa= _f._ table, desk;
    =poner la --= set the table

  =mezcla= _f._ mixture

  =mi= my

  =mí= (_after prepositions_) me

  =mientas= _see_ =mentir=

  =mientes= _see_ =mentir=

  =mientras= _prep._ during;
    _conj._ while, as long as

  =mil= a thousand

  =militar= military

  =mimar= indulge, spoil

  =mínimo, -a= least, slightest, smallest;
    =lo más --= in the slightest degree

  =ministerial= ministerial

  =ministerio= _m._ ministry;
    office;
    =de -- en --= from ministry to ministry

  =ministra= _f._ minister's wife, ministress

  =ministro= _m._ minister

  =mío, -a= mine, of mine, my;
    =el mío=, =la mía= _etc._ mine

  =mirada= _f._ glance, look

  =mirar= look, look at, have regard for;
    =--te a la cara= look at your face;
    =--se= look out, be careful, see to it;
    =mire que= look out or, bear in mind that;
    =bien mirado= carefully looked at _or_ considered

  =miserable= miserable, wretched

  =miseria= _f._ misery

  =mismo=, =-a= same, very, -self;
    =por eso --= for that very reason;
    =lo --= the same thing, in the same way;
    =lo -- da= it's all the same, it makes no difference;
    =un --= one and the same;
    =uno --= one and the same person

  =misterio= _m._ mystery

  =misterioso=, =-a= mysterious

  =mitad= _f._ half

  =moda= _f._ fashion, style

  =modelo= _m._ model

  =modernidad= _f._ modernness, newness

  =modernista= modern, up-to-date

  =moderno=, =-a= modern

  =modestia= _f._ modesty

  =modisto= _m._ dressmaker, tailor

  =modo= _m._ way, manner;
    =no... en -- alguno= by no means;
    =de cualquier --= however, in any case, in any fashion, any old way;
    =de cualquier -- que sea= however it may be, in some way or other;
    =de ese --= in that way;
    =de muchos --s= in many ways;
    =de= (_or_ =por=) =ningún --= by no means, not at all;
    =de otro --= otherwise;
    =de -- que= so that;
    =de tal --= in such a way;
    =de un --= in a way

  =molestar= molest, annoy, torment, cause trouble

  =molestia= _f._ annoyance, inconvenience

  =momento= _m._ moment;
    =en este --= at this moment, now

  =moneda= _f._ coin, money;
    =-- contante= ready money, cash

  =monstruo= _m._ monster, marvel

  =monte= _m._ mountain

  =moral= moral

  =mordaz= biting, sarcastic

  =moreno=, =-a= dark, brunette

  =moribundo=, =-a= dying

  =morir= die;
    =--se= die

  =mostrar= show

  =motivar= cause

  =motivo= _m._ motive, cause, reason

  =mover= move;
    =--se= move

  =moza= _f._ girl, maid

  =mozo= _m._ boy, porter, servant

  =mozuelo= _m._ (_dim. of_ =mozo=) young man, young fellow

  =muchacha= _f._ girl

  =muchacho= _m._ boy, youth, fellow

  =mucho=, =-a= much, a great deal of;
    =--s= many;
    =-- fuera que= it would be very strange if;
    =tener mucha razón= be quite right;
    =mucho= _adv._ much, a great deal

  =mudo=, =-a= mute, silent

  =muere= _see_ =morir=

  =muerte= _f._ death;
    =dar -- a= kill

  =muerto=, =-a= dead;
    _see_ =morir=

  =muestra= _f._ specimen, sample

  =muestr-a=, =-an= _see_ =mostrar=

  =muevas= _see_ =mover=

  =muev-e=, =-en= _see_ =mover=

  =mujer= _f._ woman, wife

  =múltiple= multiple, complex

  =multitud= _f._ multitude

  =mundo= _m._ world;
    =todo el --= everybody

  =muñeco= _m._ puppet, doll

  =muriendo= _see_ =morir=

  =murieron= _see_ =morir=

  =murmurar= murmur, whisper

  =música= _f._ music;
    =--s= musical performances, music

  =músico= _m._ musician

  =mutación= _f._ mutation, change;
    change of scene (_theatrical_)

  =mutuamente= mutually

  =mutuo, -a= mutual

  =muy= very, very much


  N

  =nacer= be born, arise

  =nada= nothing, nothing at all, at all, anything;
    =-- de= none of;
    =de -- ha de servirle= it will do him no good

  =nadie= nobody, no one, anybody

  =Nápoles= _f._ Naples

  =natural= _m._ native

  =natural= natural

  =naturaleza= _f._ nature

  =naturalidad= _f._ naturalness

  =nave= _f._ ship

  =Navidad= _f._ Christmas;
    =estas --es= this Christmas

  =necedad= _f._ stupidity, foolishness, folly

  =necesidad= _f._ necessity, need

  =necesitado, -a= needy, poor;
    _see_ =necesitar=

  =necesitar= need, need to, have to;
    =-- de= need;
    _see_ =necesitado=

  =necio= _m._ fool, simpleton

  =necio, -a= foolish, silly

  =negar= deny, refuse;
    =--se a= refuse to

  =negociante= _m._ business man, merchant

  =negocio= _m._ business, affair

  =negro, -a= black;
    =poner lo blanco --= make white seem black;
    =Campos Negros= Black Fields (_name of an imaginary place_)

  =negué= _see_ =negar=

  =nervio= _m._ nerve

  =netamente= clearly, distinctly

  =ni= neither, nor;
    not even, not;
    =-- un día más= not another day;
    =--... --= neither... nor;
    =-- siquiera= not even

  =niega= _see_ =negar=

  =nieto= _m._ grandson, grandchild;
    =--s= grandsons, grandchildren

  =ningún=, =ninguno, -a= none, not any, no;
    _pron._ no one, not any one

  =niña= _f._ girl;
    =desde muy --= since you were very young

  =niñeria= _f._ child's play, childish prank

  =niño= _m._ boy, child

  =no= no, not;
    =¡eso --!= not that!
    =eso sí que --= certainly not that;
    =sabes que --= you know that I don't

  =nobilísimo, -a= most noble, very noble

  =noble= noble

  =nobleza= _f._ nobility

  =noche= _f._ night, evening;
    =de --= at night;
    =ser de --= be night;
    =esta --= to-night;
    =esta misma --= this very night

  =nombrar= name, mention by name

  =nombre= _m._ name

  =norma= _f._ standard

  =nos= us, to us, each other, ourselves

  =nosotros= we, us, each other

  =nota= _f._ note

  =notable= notable

  =notar= note, notice

  =noticia= _f._ notice, news;
    =--s= news

  =novecientos, -as= nine hundred

  =novedad= _f._ novelty, newness, youth, news

  =novela= _f._ novel

  =novelita= _f._ (_dim. of_ =novela=) romance

  =novia= _f._ fiancée

  =noviazgo= _m._ engagement, betrothal

  =novio= _m._ fiancé

  =nuestro, -a= our, ours, of ours;
    =el nuestro, la nuestra= _etc._ ours

  =nuevamente= anew, again

  =nuevo, -a= new, fresh

  =número= _m._ number

  =nunca= never, ever

  =nupcial= nuptial


  O

  =o= or

  =obligación= _f._ obligation, binding promise, bond

  =obligar= oblige, force, compel;
    favor

  =obra= _f._ work, deed, literary production, output

  =obrita= _f._ (_dim. of_ =obra=) little work, short piece

  =obscuridad= _f._ obscurity, darkness

  =obscuro, -a= obscure, dark

  =obsequiar= entertain, make presents, favor;
    =obsequiada con un regalito= presented with a little gift

  =obstante= obstructing;
    =no --= nevertheless, however

  =obstinarse= en persist in

  =obtendréis= _see_ =obtener=

  =obtener= obtain, get

  =ocasión= _f._ occasion, opportunity;
    =poner en -- de= put in a position to, give an opportunity to, enable to

  =ocaso= _m._ setting

  =ocio= _m._ leisure, idleness;
    =--s= leisure moments, leisure, idleness

  =ocultar= hide

  =ocupación= _f._ occupation

  =ocupar= occupy

  =ocurrir= occur, happen;
    =¿qué le ocurre?= what's the matter with him?

  =ochenta= eighty

  =ocho= eight

  =odio= _m._ hatred

  =odioso, -a= odious, hateful

  =ofender= offend

  =ofensa= _f._ offense;
    =-- de palabra= offense by word of mouth, spoken insult

  =oficial= official

  =oficio= _m._ office, duty, service

  =ofrecer= offer

  =ofrezca= _see_ =ofrecer=

  =ofrezco= _see_ =ofrecer=

  =oído= _m._ (_inner_) ear

  =¡oh!= oh!

  =oír= hear

  =ojo= _m._ eye;
    =a mis propios --s= in my own eyes

  =olvidar= forget;
    =--se de= forget

  =ópalo= _m._ opal

  =opinión= _f._ opinion, public opinion

  =opondré= _see_ =oponer=

  =oponer= oppose;
    =--se= (=a=) oppose, resist

  =oponga= _see_ =oponer=

  =oposición= _f._ opposition;
    =las --es= the opposition (_especially of a political party_)

  =oprimir= oppress;
    =los oprimidos= those oppressed

  =oración= _f._ prayer

  =oráculo= _m._ oracle

  =orden= _m._ order, system;
    =poner -- en= put in order, set straight;
    =por el --= in the order;
    =para Orden público= to be a policeman

  =orden= _f._ order, command, rank

  =Ordenanza= _f._ decree, ordinance, statute

  =ordenar= order, direct, bid, command

  =ordinario, -a= ordinary, usual;
    =de --= usually

  =orejita= _f._ (_dim. of_ =oreja=) little ear

  =orgullo= _m._ pride

  =orgulloso, -a= proud, vain

  =origen= _m._ origin

  =original= original

  =oro= _m._ gold;
    =-- de ley= standard gold

  =os= (_from_ =vosotros=) you, to you, each other, one another, yourselves

  =osadía= _f._ daring, boldness

  =osado, -a= daring, bold;
    =ser -- a= be bold enough to, dare to;
    _see_ =osar=

  =osar= dare;
    _see_ =osado=

  =ostentar= display

  =otro, -a= other, another, different;
    =esto --= this other thing;
    =de -- modo= otherwise;
    =--s tales= the same kind of;
    =-- tanto= the same, just the same;
    =--s tantos= just as many;
    =enamorarse el uno del --= fall in love with each other;
    =otra vez= another time, again;
    =otras veces= at other times

  =oy-es=, =-e= _see_ =oír=

  =oyó= _see_ =oír=


  P

  =pabellón= _m._ pavilion

  =paciencia= _f._ patience

  =padecer= suffer

  =padre= _m._ father;
    =--s= fathers, parents

  =pagar= pay, pay for

  =pago= _m._ payment

  =paguéis= _see_ =pagar=

  =país= _m._ country, nation

  =paje= _m._ page, attendant

  =palabra= _f._ word, speech;
    =dirigir la -- a= address;
    =ofensa de --= offense by word of mouth, spoken insult

  =palacio= _m._ palace;
    =en Palacio= in the Palace (_the Royal Palace in Madrid_)

  =paloma= _f._ pigeon, dove

  =palpable= palpable

  =Pandectas= _f. pl._ Pandects _see page 100, note 3_

  =Pantalón= _m._ Pantaloon _see page 119_

  =papá= _m._ papa, father

  =papel= _m._ paper, securities;
    rôle

  =papelote= _m._ (_aug. of_ =papel=) big paper, paper (_depreciative_)

  =par= _m._ pair, couple

  =par= equal;
    =abierto de -- en --= wide open

  =para= for, to;
    =--= + _inf._ (in order) to, to;
    =-- ese día= by that day;
    =leer -- sí= read to oneself;
    =-- Orden público= to be a policeman;
    =-- soldado= to be a soldier;
    =-- que= in order that, that;
    _for other expressions containing_ =para= _see Notes and
    other headings in this vocabulary_

  =parado, -a= stopping, standing;
    _see_ =parar=

  =parar= stop, stay, live;
    _see_ =parado=

  =parcial= partial

  =parecer= _m._ appearance, looks;
    =al --= apparently;
    _see below_

  =parecer= appear, seem;
    =--se a= resemble, look like;
    =¿qué os parece?= what do you think?
    =no parece sino que= it seems that you only;
    =¿no te parece?= don't you think so?

  =pareja= _f._ pair, couple

  =parezca= _see_ =parecer=

  =pariente= _m._ relative, cousin

  =París= _m._ Paris

  =parte= _f._ part, portion, share;
    place, side, direction;
    party (_in a lawsuit_);
    =de -- de= on behalf of, on the part of;
    =de mi --= on my part;
    =de su= (=vuestra=) =--= on his (their, your) behalf _or_ side;
    =de -- suya= on his part _or_ behalf;
    =por -- de= on the part of;
    =por mi --= for my part, as far as I am concerned;
    =no... por -- de ninguno= not... on anybody's part;
    =de cada --= on each side;
    =por otra --= moreover;
    =de otras --s= from other places _or_ directions;
    =en todas --s= everywhere;
    =no... en -- alguna= not... anywhere;
    =¿de qué --?= on which side?
    =dar su -- a= give (_something_) its due, recognize
    the importance of (_something_);
    =ser -- en= have a share in, have a hand in

  =particular= particular, private

  =particularmente= privately

  =partida= _f._ game

  =partido= _m._ (_political_) party;
    match

  =pasado, -a= past;
    =-- mañana= the day after to-morrow;
    =el verano --= last summer;
    _see_ =pasar=

  =pasar= pass, spend, give, hand;
    feel, endure;
    go, proceed, enter, come in;
    happen;
    =-- cuidado= worry;
    =-- por= pass for, be considered;
    go through, stand, endure;
    =me estoy pasando= I'm becoming _passée_, I'm growing old;
    _see_ =pasado=

  =pasear= promenade, walk, stroll

  =pasillo= _m._ (_dim. of_ =paso=) passage, corridor

  =pasión= _f._ passion

  =pasioncilla= _f._ (_dim. of_ =pasión=) trivial _or_ fleeting passion

  =pasmarote= _m._ person stunned by astonishment, graven image

  =paso= _m._ passage, step;
    =dar un= -- take a step;

    =un -- más= one step further, another step

  =pastel= _m._ pie;
     =-- de liebre= hare pie

  =patrimonio= _m._ patrimony

  =pecar= sin;
    =-- de= + _adj._ be too... ;
    =-- por exceso= sin by excess, go too far

  =pecuniario, -a= pecuniary, monetary

  =pedir= beg, demand, ask, ask for;
    =-- cuenta de= ask for an account of

  =pegar= hit, strike;
    fight, quarrel

  =peinadora= _f._ hairdresser

  =peinar= comb, dress (the hair)

  =peligro= _m._ danger

  =peligroso, -a= dangerous

  =pellejo= _m._ skin, hide

  =pena= _f._ difficulty, trouble, toil;
    =valer la --= be worth the trouble, be worth while

  =penoso, -a= toilsome, painful, difficult

  =pensamiento= _m._ thought

  =pensar= think, think about, expect, plan;
    =-- en= think of _or_ about, expect to

  =peña= _f._ rock, cliff;
    =Peñas Rojas= Red Cliffs (_name of an imaginary place_)

  =peor= _adj. and adv._ worse, worst

  =Pepe= _m._ (_fam. for_ =José=) Joe

  =Pepito= _m._ (_dim. of_ =Pepe=) little Pepe _or_ Joe
    (_it is best to retain the Spanish name_)

  =pequeño, -a= small, little;
    =en --= on a small scale

  =percibir= perceive, hear

  =perder= lose, destroy, ruin;
    =-- de vista= lose sight of;
    =--se= ruin oneself, be lost, come into disfavor

  =perdición= _f._ perdition

  =perdiz= _f._ partridge

  =perdón= _m._ pardon

  =perdonar= pardon, forgive

  =perfectamente= perfectly

  =perfecto, -a= perfect

  =perfil= _m._ profile

  =periódico= _m._ newspaper, journal

  =perjudicar= injure;
    =decirse perjudicado= call oneself injured

  =perjuicio= _m._ injury, damage, harm;
    =sin -- de= without prejudice to, without (its) preventing (you) from

  =permanecer= remain

  =permanencia= _f._ stay, continuance

  =permitir= permit, allow, let

  =pero= but; _see page 12, note 5_

  =perro= _m._ dog

  =persa= Persian

  =perseguir= pursue

  =persigue= _see_ =perseguir=

  =persona= _f._ person, individual;
    =--s= _also_ people;
    =-- de crédito= person of good character, responsible person;
    =-- de valimiento= person of influence

  =personaje= _m._ personage, character

  =personal= personal

  =personalidad= _f._ personality

  =personalmente= personally

  =perteneciente= belonging

  =pertrechar= equip

  =pesado, -a= heavy, wearisome;
    =¡no seas --!= don't be a nuisance;
    _see_ =pesar=

  =pesar= _m._ sorrow, regret, concern;
    =a -- de= in spite of;
    =a -- mío= to my regret;
    =a nuestro --= in spite of ourselves

  =pesar= grieve, cause pain _or_ regret _see_ =pesado=

  =peseta= _f._ peseta (_a coin_ = _about twenty cents_)

  =pesimista= pessimistic

  =peso= _m._ weight

  =pez= _f._ pitch, tar

  =piadoso, -a= pious, merciful;
    =acogerse a lo --= resort to pious means

  =Picardía= _f._ Picardy

  =picardía= _f._ knavery, roguery

  =pícaro= _m._ knave, rogue

  =pícaro, -a= rascally, roguish

  =pidamos= _see_ =pedir=

  =pid-o=, =-e=, =-en= _see_ =pedir=

  =pie= _m._ foot;
    =de --= on foot

  =piel= _f._ skin

  =piens-e=, =-es=, =-e=, =-en= _see_ =pensar=

  =piens-o=, =-as=, =-a=, =-an= _see_ =pensar=

  =pierd-e=, =-en= _see_ =perder=

  =pintar= paint, describe;
    =de lo vivo a lo pintado= between life and painting

  =pintura= _f._ painting, picture

  =placer= please

  =plácido, -a= placid, calm, tranquil

  =plan= _m._ plan, scheme

  =¡plan!= _interj. used to imitate sound of drum_

  =plano= _m._ plane;
    =primer --= fore-ground, forefront

  =plano, -a= plain, level, even;
    =dar de --= strike directly, hit squarely

  =planta= _f._ sole of the foot, foot

  =plaza= _f._ square, place;
    =-- fuerte= fortress, stronghold

  =plazca= _see_ =placer=

  =plazo= _m._ term, time, delay, date _or_ limit of payment

  =plebeyo, -a= plebeian, common

  =plectro= _m._ plectrum (_for playing stringed instruments_)

  =plenitud= _f._ fulness

  =pluma= _f._ pen

  =pobre= poor, wretched, miserable;
    =el --= the poor man;
    =los --s= the poor;
    =-- de ambiciones= lacking in ambition;
    =¡-- de mí!= poor me!

  =pobrecito, -a= (_dim. of_ =pobre=) poor;
    =¡--!= poor fellow!

  =pobrete= (_dim. of_ =pobre=) poor;
    =los --s= the poor

  =poco, -a= little, a little, but little;
    _adv. also_ very little, not very;
    =--s= few, a few;
    =al= _or_ =en -- tiempo= in a short time;
    =a --= after a little while, soon;
    =-- a --= little by little, gradually, slowly;
    =-- más o menos= more or less, about;
    =gentecilla de -- más o menos= people of little account;
    =un -- de= a little

  =poder= _m._ power, hands

  =poder= be able;
    can, may;
    =no -- con= be unable to stand;
    =tanto --= be able to do so much, be so powerful

  =poderoso, -a= powerful;
    =los --s= the powerful, the mighty

  =podr-é=, =-ás=, =-á=, =-án= _see_ =poder=

  =podría= _see_ =poder=

  =poema= _m._ poem

  =poesía= _f._ poetry

  =poeta= _m._ poet

  =poético, -a= poetic

  =Polichinela= _m._ Punch;
    =estos viejos polichinelas= these old clowns;
    _see page 119_

  =política= _f._ politics

  =político, -a= political

  =pon= _see_ =poner=

  =ponderación= _f._ consideration, praise, eulogy, talk

  =pondr-é=, =-á= _see_ =poner=

  =poner= put, put on, place, set;
    put in, fix, arrange;
    charge;
    =-- lo blanco negro= make white seem black;
    =-- en evidencia= make clear, make known, demonstrate, set forth;
    =-- en juego= put into play;
    =-- de largo= put long dresses on;
    =-- de mal humor= put into a bad humor;
    =-- la mesa= set the table;
    =-- en ocasión de= put in a position to, give the opportunity to;
    =-- orden en= put in order, set straight;
    =-- en ridículo= make a fool of;
    =-- me a riesgo de= run the risk of my;
    =-- sospecha en= cast suspicion upon;
    =--se= become, get;
    put on;
    =--se de acuerdo= come to an agreement;
    =--se al alcance de= get within reach of;
    =--se en ridículo= make a fool of oneself;
    =poned sesenta= make it sixty

  =pong-a=, =-áis= _see_ =poner=

  =pongo= _see_ =poner=

  =popularidad= _f._ popularity

  =populoso, -a= populous

  =por= for, in exchange for, by, through, about, on account of,
    for the sake of;
    =--= + _inf._ through, because of;
    in order to;
    =--= + _adj. or adv._ =que= however, although;
    =-- noble que sea= however noble she may be;
    =-- que= in order that;
    =¿-- qué?= why?
    =no tener -- qué= have no reason to;
    =-- sí= by himself;
    =-- lo tanto= therefore;
    _for other expressions containing_ =por= _see Notes and
    other headings in this vocabulary_

  =porque= because

  =portero= _m._ porter, janitor

  =porvenir= _m._ future

  =posada= _f._ inn, lodging house

  =posible= possible;
    =todo lo --= everything possible

  =posición= _f._ position

  =postrimería= _f._ last period of life;
    =--s= last years

  =potaje= _m._ porridge, stew

  =practicable= practicable, feasible;
    =puerta --= door that opens and shuts (_in stage setting_)

  =práctico, -a= practical

  =preceder= precede

  =precio= _m._ price, value

  =precisamente= precisely, exactly, just

  =preciso, -a= necessary

  =preferible= preferable

  =preferir= prefer

  =pregunta= _f._ question

  =preguntar= ask, question

  =prelado= _m._ prelate

  =prendar= pledge, charm;
    =--se de= take a fancy to

  =prender= seize, arrest;
    pin, fix, set;
    take root, catch, be catching

  =preocupación= _f._ worry, care

  =preparado, -a= prepared, ready;
    _see_ =preparar=

  =preparar= prepare;
    _see_ =preparado=

  =presencia= _f._ presence, appearance

  =presenciar= witness

  =presentar= present, introduce, exhibit, give

  =presente= present, at hand;
    =de --= at present, now

  =presidente= _m._ presiding officer, chairman, president

  =presidir= preside, preside over

  =prestar= lend, offer;
    =--se a= lend _or_ offer oneself to, be ready _or_ willing to

  =presumir= presume;
    =-- de= boast of

  =presunción= _f._ presumption

  =presupuesto= _m._ estimate, budget;
    =--s= estimates, budget

  =pretender= pretend (to), expect (to), claim (to); try (to), attempt (to);
    woo, court

  =pretexto= _m._ pretext

  =prevenido, -a= prepared, provided, foreseen;
    _see_ =prevenir=

  =prevenir= prepare, notify;
    _see_ =prevenido=

  =previno= _see_ =prevenir=

  =previo, -a= previous, prior

  =previsión= _f._ foresight

  =prima= _f._ cousin

  =primeramente= first, in the first place

  =primer=(=o=), =-a= first;
    =lo --= the first thing;
    =de buenas a primeras= suddenly

  =primero= _adv._ first, at first

  =primitivo, -a= primitive, early

  =primo= _m._ cousin

  =princesa= _f._ princess;
    =Teatro de la Princesa= _see page 113_

  =principal= principal

  =príncipe= _m._ prince

  =principio= _m._ beginning, start;
    principle;
    =a --s de= at the beginning of

  =prisa= _f._ hurry, haste;
    =de --= hurriedly, fast

  =privación= _f._ privation

  =privanza= _f._ protection, favor

  =privar= deprive;
    =--se de= deprive oneself of, go without

  =privilegio= _m._ privilege

  =probabilidad= _f._ probability

  =probar= try, test, prove

  =proceder= proceed

  =procedimiento= _m._ proceeding, legal procedure

  =proceso= _m._ process, case, lawsuit

  =proclamar= proclaim, declare

  =producción= _f._ production

  =profesor= _m._ professor, teacher

  =prólogo= _m._ prologue, introduction

  =promesa= _f._ promise

  =prometer= promise;
    _see_ =prometido=

  =prometido= _m._ betrothed, fiancé

  =pronosticar= predict

  =pronto, -a= prompt, quick, fast, ready

  =pronto= _adv._ quickly, soon, early;
    =¡--!= quick!
    =de --= suddenly

  =propicio, -a= propitious

  =propio, -a= proper, suitable;
    own;
    self;
    =-- de= suited to, befitting, characteristic of;
    =propia alabanza= self-praise;
    =el -- Aretino= Aretino himself;
    =sí --= himself, herself etc.

  =proponer= propose;
    =--se= purpose, plan, propose

  =proporcionar= supply, provide with, furnish

  =proposición= _f._ proposition, proposal

  =propósito= _m._ purpose, intention, object, occasion;
    =a --= by the way;
    =¿a qué --?= with what purpose?

  =propuesto= _see_ =proponer=

  =prosa= _f._ prose

  =proscenio= _m._ proscenium, front (_of the stage_);
   _see page 39, note 1_

  =protocolo= _m._ protocol, record, document

  =provecho= _m._ profit, advantage, benefit;
    =con --= profitably, to advantage

  =proveer de= provide with, supply with

  =provincia= _f._ province;
    =de --= provincial

  =provisión= _f._ provision, filling

  =provocar= provoke, arouse, cause

  =proyecto= _m._ project, plan

  =prudente= prudent, wise

  =prueba= _f._ proof

  =prueba= _see_ =probar=

  =publicación= _f._ publication

  =publicar= publish

  =público= _m._ public

  =pudding= _m._ (_Eng._) pudding

  =pud-e=, =-iste=, =-o=, =-ieron= _see_ =poder=

  =pud-iera=, =-iéramos= _see_ =poder=

  =pueblo= _m._ town, village;
    populace, people, common people

  =pueda= _see_ =poder=

  =pued-o=, =-es=, =-e=, =-en= _see_ =poder=

  =puente= _m._ bridge;
    =Puente Nuevo= _see page 39, note 3_

  =puerta= _f._ door

  =puerto= _m._ port, harbor;
    =llegar a buen --= reach a safe port _or_ haven of refuge

  =pues= well, then, so

  =puesto= _m._ post, place

  =puesto= _see_ =poner=

  =pulcro=, =-a= neat, graceful

  =punta= _f._ point;
    =en --= pointed

  =punto= _m._ point, dot, spot, place;
    =al --= immediately, straightway;
    =estar a -- de= be on the point of;
    =estar en su --= be at its height

  =puntualizar= give a detailed account of, tell in detail, specify

  =puntuar= punctuate

  =puramente= purely, simply, merely

  =pureza= _f._ purity, simplicity

  =puro=, =-a= pure, simple

  =pus-e=, =-o=, =-imos=, =-ieron= _see_ =poner=


  Q

  =que= _rel. pron._ who, which, that;
    =el=, =la=, =los=, =las --= who, which, that;
    the one who, he who, _etc._;
    =lo --= that which, what;
    _see_ =lo=

  =¿qué?= what?
    =¡--!= what! what a! how!
    =¿a --?= for what? for what purpose? why?
    =¡-- de!= how many!
    =¿por --?= why?
    =no tener por --= have no reason to;
    =no sé --= something or other

  =que= _adv._ than, as

  =que= _conj._ that; for, because; until;
    =es --= the fact is that, it's because;
    =no es --= it isn't that, it isn't because;
    _for other meanings and uses see Notes and other
    headings in this vocabulary_

  =quebrantar= break

  =quedar= remain, stay, be left, be;
    =--= + _p. p._ remain, be;
    =-- bien= (=mal=) =con= remain _or_ be on good (bad) terms with;
    =-- en= agree to;
    =-- en cuidado= be anxious;
    =--se= remain, stay;
    =--se sin= remain without, lose;
    =no me quedan otros medios= I have no other means left

  =queja= _f._ complaint

  =quejarse= complain;
    =-- de= complain of

  =querella= _f._ complaint, dispute

  =querellante= _m._ complainant, disputant

  =querer= want, wish, desire;
    =-- a= love, like;
    =-- decir= mean;
    =¡quiera el Cielo!= may heaven grant!
    =quisiera= I should like;
    _see_ =querido=

  =querido=, =-a= beloved, dear;
    _see_ =querer=

  =querrás= _see_ =querer=

  =quien= who, whom;
    the one who, he who, _etc._;
    =hay -- dice= there are some who say, it is said

  =¿quién?= who? whom?

  =quier-as=, =-a= _see_ =querer=

  =quier-o=, =-es=, =-e=, =-en= _see_ =querer=

  =quis-e=, =-iste=, =-o=, =-ieron= _see_ =querer=

  =quis-iera=, =-iéramos=, =-ierais=, =-ieran= _see_ =querer=

  =quitar= take, take away, rob


  R

  =rabia= _f._ rage, wrath, anger

  =rabiar= rage;
    =-- por= long eagerly to

  =Ramón= _m._ Raymond

  =¡ran!= (_interj. used to imitate sound of drum_)

  =rápido=, =-a= rapid, quick, swift

  =raro=, =-a= rare, uncommon, extraordinary

  =raso= _m._ satin

  =rastrear= rake

  =¡rataplán!= (_interj. used to imitate sound of drum_)

  =rayar= border on, begin;
    =rayaba el día= day was breaking

  =razón= _f._ reason, right, justice;
    cause, motive;
    =razones= words, talk, argument;
    =hablar en --= talk sensibly _or_ logically;
    =ser --= be right _or_ proper;
    =tener --= be right;
    =tener más --= be more correct;
    =tener mucha --= be quite right

  =razonable= reasonable, fair, just

  =real= royal;
    =Teatro Real= _see page 5, note 3_

  =realidad= _f._ reality, truth

  =realista= realistic

  =realizar= realize

  =realmente= really

  =rebajar= lower, cheapen

  =recibir= receive

  =recitar= recite

  =recobrar= recover

  =recoger= gather, collect, pick up, take up, adopt, accept

  =recomendación= _f._ recommendation

  =recomendar= recommend

  =recompensar= reward

  =reconocer= recognize

  =recordar= remember, recall, recollect;
    =-- de= remember

  =recuerd-as, -a= _see_ =recordar=

  =recuerdo= _m._ remembrance, recollection, memory, souvenir

  =recurso= _m._ recourse, resource

  =redimir= redeem

  =reducir= reduce

  =referir= tell, relate, report

  =refinar= refine

  =refirió= _see_ =referir=

  =reflexionar= reflect

  =regalar= make presents, present, give

  =regalito= _m._ (_dim. of_ =regalo=) small present, little gift

  =regalo= _m._ present, gift;
    comfort, luxury

  =regañar= quarrel

  =región= _f._ region

  =registrar= search, examine

  =regocijado, -a= merry, joyful, festive

  =regocijo= _m._ joy, gladness, merriment, rejoicing

  =regreso= _m._ return

  =regular= regular, common, average;
    =por lo --= usually, as a rule

  =rehacer= remake, make again, repair

  =reino= _m._ realm, kingdom

  =reír= laugh;
    =--se= laugh, scoff;
    =--se de= laugh at

  =relación= _f._ relation

  =relativo, -a= relative

  =relucir= shine;
    =salir a --= come to light

  =remar= row

  =remedio= _m._ remedy, help;
    =¡qué --!= what remedy!
    what else is to be done!

  =remo= _m._ oar

  =rendirse= give oneself up, yield, submit

  =renegar de= renounce, disown

  =renovar= renew

  =renunciar a= renounce, give up

  =reñir= quarrel, scold

  =reparación= _f._ reparation, amends

  =reparar= repair, compensate, indemnify, make amends for;
    =-- en= hesitate at, stop for; notice

  =reparto= _m._ distribution, cast of characters

  =replicar= reply

  =reponer= replace, restore, recover

  =reposo= _m._ repose, rest

  =reprender= reprove, scold

  =representación= _f._ representation, performance

  =representante= _m._ representative

  =representar= represent, perform

  =reprochar= reproach, blame, blame for

  =reproducción= _f._ reproduction

  =repugnar a= be repugnant to, oppose;
    =le repugna...= he dislikes...

  =reputación= _f._ reputation

  =requerir= require

  =residir= reside

  =resignación= _f._ resignation

  =resignaos= (=resignad= + =os=)

  =resignar= resign, give up;
    =--se a= resign oneself to, submit to;
    =--se con= resign oneself to, make up one's mind to endure

  =resistir= resist, stand, endure

  =resolución= _f._ resolution, determination

  =resolver= resolve, solve, decide

  =respecto a= (_or_ =de=) with respect to

  =respeto= _m._ respect, consideration;
    =guardar --= show respect

  =resplandor= _m._ light, splendor, brilliancy, radiance

  =responder= respond, answer

  =resultado= _m._ result

  =resultando= _see page 85, note 3_

  =resultar= result, follow

  =retardado, -a= retarded, old-fashioned

  =retirar= withdraw;
    =--se= retire, withdraw

  =retroceder= retreat, draw back

  =reunir= collect;
    =--se= meet, collect, come together

  =reverencia= _f._ reverence, bow

  =reverenciar= revere, venerate

  =revolucionario, -a= revolutionary

  =rico, -a= rich

  =ridiculizar= ridicule

  =ridículo= _m._ ridicule;
    =poner en --= make a fool of;
    =ponerse en --= make a fool of oneself

  =ridículo, -a= ridiculous

  =rí-es, -en= _see_ =reír=

  =riesgo= _m._ risk, danger, peril;
    =ponerme a -- de= run the risk of my

  =rigurosamente= strictly

  =río= _m._ river

  =riqueza= _f._ riches, wealth

  =riquísimo, -a= extremely rich, very rich

  =¡ris!= (_interj. used to imitate sound of sword cutting_)

  =risa= _f._ laughter;
    =--s= bursts of laughter, laughter

  =Risela= _f._ _no English equivalent_

  =risueño, -a= smiling;
    =el --= the smiling man, merry person

  =robar= rob, steal

  =robo= _m._ robbery

  =rodear= surround

  =rodeo= _m._ winding, turn, circumlocution, evasion;
    =no andar con --s= be too outspoken, take too many liberties

  =rogar= ask, beg, beseech

  =rojo, -a= red;
    =Peñas Rojas= Red Cliffs (_name of an imaginary place_)

  =romancesco, -a= romantic

  =romanticismo= _m._ romanticism

  =romántico, -a= romantic

  =romper= break, destroy, tear up

  =rosa= _f._ rose

  =rubio, -a= fair, blonde

  =ruboroso, -a= blushing, bashful

  =rufián= _m._ ruffian

  =ruido= _m._ noise, uproar

  =ruin= mean, vile, base

  =ruina= _f._ ruin, destruction

  =ruindad= _f._ meanness, baseness

  =ruinmente= meanly, basely

  =ruinoso, -a= ruinous, worthless

  =Ruiz= _no English equivalent_


  S

  =saber= _m._ knowledge

  =saber= know, understand, learn;
    know how to, can;
    =-- cómo= know how to;
    =no sé qué= something or other;
    =no, que yo sepa= not that I know of

  =sabiamente= wisely

  =sabiduría= _f._ wisdom

  =sabio= _m._ wise man, learned man, sage

  =sabor= _m._ savor, taste, flavor

  =sabr-é, -ás, -á, -emos, -éis= _see_ =saber=

  =sabr-ía= _see_ =saber=

  =sacar= take out, remove;
    clear, free, help out;
    take;
    get, secure, obtain;
    =-- testimonio= take testimony

  =sacrificar= sacrifice

  =sacrificio= _m._ sacrifice

  =sagaz= sagacious, cunning

  =sagrado, -a= sacred, holy

  =sal= _see_ =salir=

  =sala= _f._ room

  =saldr-é, -ás, -á, -emos= _see_ =salir=

  =salga= _see_ =salir=

  =salgo= _see_ =salir=

  =salir= go out, go away, leave, depart, escape;
    get out;
    enter, exit (_used on stage_);
    =-- a= take after, resemble;
    =-- a relucir= come to light;
    =-- adelante= get ahead, get out, emerge, escape

  =salón= _m._ parlor, reception room;
    =cronista de salones= society reporter

  =salteador= _m._ highwayman;
    =-- de caminos= highwayman

  =saltear= assault, attack

  =salud= _f._ health;
    =¡--!= to your health!

  =saludar= salute, greet

  =saludo= _m._ salutation, greeting, bow

  =salvar= save;
    =--se= save oneself, escape

  =salvo, -a= saved, safe

  =santo= _m._ saint

  =santo, -a= holy, sacred

  =saque= _see_ =sacar=

  =sastre= _m._ tailor

  =sátira= _f._ satire

  =satírico, -a= satirical

  =satirizar= satirize

  =satisfacción= _f._ satisfaction

  =satisfacer= satisfy, content, please

  =satisfaga= _see_ =satisfacer=

  =satisfecho, -a= satisfied

  =sayón= _m._ cruel person, barbarian

  =se= himself, herself, itself, yourself, themselves, yourselves;
    each other;
    to himself, _etc._;
    to him, to her, _etc._

  =sé= _see_ =saber=

  =se-a, -as, -áis, -an= _see_ =ser=

  =secretario= _m._ secretary

  =secreto= _m._ secret

  =secreto, -a= secret, confidential

  =seguida= _f._ succession;
    =en --= at once, immediately

  =seguir= follow, continue, go on;
    =--= + _pres. part._ go on, continue, be;
    =-- adelante= go ahead;
    =sigues equivocado= you are still mistaken

  =según= _prep._ according to;
    _conj._ according as, just as, as

  =segundo, -a= second;
    =la segunda derecha=, =la segunda izquierda= _see page 39, note 1_

  =seguramente= surely

  =seguridad= _f._ security, safety, assurance

  =seguro, -a= secure, safe, sure, certain, unfailing;
    =de --= surely;
    =de -- que= + _verb_ surely;
    =tener por --= consider it certain, be sure, rest assured

  =selección= _f._ selection

  =semejante= similar, like, such

  =semejar= resemble, be like

  =Senado= _m._ Senate (_corresponding approximately to the
     Senate in the United States_)

  =sencillez= _f._ simplicity

  =sencillo, -a= simple

  =sensible= sensitive, feeling

  =sentaos= (=sentad= + =os=)

  =sentar= seat, sit down;
    =-- a= become, suit, be suitable to;
    =--se= sit down, be seated

  =sentencia= _f._ sentence, decision, judgment, opinion

  =sentenciar= sentence, pass judgment, condemn

  =sentencioso, -a= sententious, pithy

  =sentido= _m._ sense; direction;
    =sin --= senseless, unconscious

  =sentimiento= _m._ sentiment, feeling

  =sentir= feel, realize;
    regret, be sorry for;
    =--se= feel;
    =mucho lo siento= I am very sorry

  =seña= _f._ sign, signal

  =señor= _m._ sir, Mr.;
    lord, master;
    gentleman;
    _sometimes not translated, see page 24, note 1_

  =señora= _f._ lady, Mrs., madam;
    wife;
    =-- de compañía= companion

  =señoría= _f._ lordship, mastery, power

  =señorita= _f._ (_dim. of_ =señora=) young lady, Miss

  =señorito= _m._ (_dim. of_ =señor=) young gentleman

  =sep-a, -amos, -an= _see_ =saber=

  =separar= separate;
    =mostrar separado= show separated _or_ show separately

  =ser= _m._ being, creature

  =ser= be;
    =-- de= belong to;
    become of;
    =-- fuerza= be necessary;
    =llegar a --= come to be, become;
    =-- parte en= have a share in, have a hand in;
    =venir a --= come to be, become;
    =es que= the fact is that, it's because;
    =si eso fuera= if that were the case;
    =si por él fuera= if it depended on him;
    =o sea= or in other words, or;
    =sea como sea= however it may be, in any case;
    =sea quien sea= whoever it may be;
    =¿qué será de mí?= what will become of me?

  =serenidad= _f._ serenity, calmness

  =seriamente= seriously

  =serie= _f._ series

  =serio, -a= serious

  =servicio= _m._ service, duty;
    =escalera de --= back stairs

  =servidor= _m._ servant

  =servidumbre= _f._ service, servitude, attendance

  =servir= serve, be fitted, be of use, help;
    =-- de= serve as, avail, be of use;
    =no -- de nada a= (=de nada -- a=) be of no use to;
    =no -- para= be unsuited for;
    =ni sirve= it isn't even of any help;
    =¿quién sirve?= who is in attendance? who's there?

  =sesenta= sixty

  =severo, -a= severe, strict

  =si= _conj._ if, whether;
    why, well, indeed;
    =-- acaso= well, perhaps

  =sí= _adv._ yes;
    indeed, of course;
    =eso --= yes indeed;
    =eso -- que no= certainly not that

  =sí= (_after prepositions_) _pron._ himself, herself,
     itself, oneself, themselves;
    =en -- mismo= in oneself;
    =por -- solo= by itself

  =siempre= always;
    =lo de --= the constant _or_ usual thing;
    =para --= forever;
    =-- que= _conj._ whenever, provided that

  =sienta= _see_ =sentar=

  =sienta= _see_ =sentir=

  =sient-o, -e= _see_ =sentir=

  =sigamos= _see_ =seguir=

  =sigilo= _m._ secrecy

  =siglo= _m._ century, age

  =significar= signify, mean

  =significación= _f._ significance, meaning

  =sigo= _see_ =seguir=

  =sigu-es, -e= _see_ =seguir=

  =siguiente= following, next;
    =al día --= on the following _or_ next day;
    _see_ =seguir=

  =siguiendo= _see_ =seguir=

  =silencio= _m._ silence

  =Silvia= _f._ Silvia

  =sillón= _m._ armchair

  =simpatía= _f._ sympathy

  =simpático, -a= attractive

  =simple= simple, artless, silly

  =sin= without;
    =-- embargo= however, yet, nevertheless;
    =-- que= _conj._ without

  =sinceridad= _f._ sincerity

  =singular= singular, strange, extraordinary

  =sino= but, except;
    =no hay --= there is nothing to do but;
    =-- que= _conj._ but, except that;
    =no... -- que= only;
    =no parece -- que= it seems that you only

  =siquiera= at least, even;
    =ni --= not even

  =Sirena= _f._ _no English equivalent_

  =sirv-a, -an= _see_ =servir=

  =sirv-es, -e, -en= _see_ =servir=

  =sirvió= _see_ =servir=

  =sistema= _m._ system

  =sitio= _m._ place, spot

  =situación= _f._ situation

  =soberano, -a= sovereign, preeminent

  =sobrar= be more than enough;
    =me sobran razones= I have more than enough reasons

  =sobre= over, above, on, upon;
    =-- todo= above all, especially

  =sobreponerse a= rise above, rise superior to

  =sobriedad= _f._ sobriety

  =sobrina= _f._ niece

  =sobrio, -a= sober

  =socavar= excavate, dig

  =social= social

  =sociedad= _f._ society;
    =crónica de --= society news

  =socorrer= help, aid, serve

  =sofocado, -a= suffocated, out of breath;
    =cómo vengo de sofocada= how out of breath I come

  =sois= _see_ =ser=

  =sol= _m._ sun

  =soldada= _f._ salary, wages, pay

  =soldado= _m._ soldier;
    =para --= to be a soldier

  =soler= be accustomed to;
    =solía= (he) used to

  =solicitar= solicit entreat, request

  =solitario, -a= solitary, lonely

  =soliviantar= rouse

  =solo, -a= sole, single, alone, only;
    =-- de criada= without a servant;
    =a solas= alone

  =sólo= _adv._ only;
    =no --... sino= not only... but (also)

  =soltar= unfasten, loosen, let go, give up;
    =sin -- blanca= without spending _or_ paying a cent

  =solución= _f._ solution

  =sombra= _f._ shade, shadow

  =sombrero= _m._ hat

  =somos= _see_ =ser=

  =son= _m._ sound

  =son= _see_ =ser=

  =sonar= sound, ring

  =soneto= _m._ sonnet

  =sonreír= smile

  =sonríe= _see_ =sonreír=

  =soñar= dream, dream of, desire earnestly;
    =-- con= dream of _or_ about, think about, indulge in

  =soportar= endure, stand

  =sorpresa= _f._ surprise

  =sosiego= _m._ tranquillity, rest, calm

  =sospecha= _f._ suspicion;
    =poner -- en= cast suspicion upon

  =sospechar de= suspect

  =sostendr-á, -emos= _see_ =sostener=

  =sostener= sustain, maintain, support, continue, keep up

  =soy= _see_ =ser=

  =su= his, her, its, your, their

  =subir= go up, come up, rise, ascend

  =sublime= sublime

  =subvenir= (=a=) assist, provide, supply

  =suceder= happen;
    =¿qué os sucede?= what is the matter with you?
    =lo que os sucede es que= the trouble with you is that;
    =suceda lo que suceda= happen what may, whatever may happen;
    =todo lo sucedido= all that has happened

  =suceso= _m._ event, happening

  =suegro= _m._ father-in-law

  =suele= _see_ =soler=

  =suelo= _m._ ground, earth

  =suene= _see_ =sonar=

  =sueño= _m._ dream, vision;
    =por --= through a dream _or_ vision

  =sueñ-o, -a= _see_ =soñar=

  =suerte= _f._ chance, luck;
    fate, lot, destiny

  =suficiente= sufficient, enough, clear, good, satisfactory;
    =lo --= what is sufficient

  =suficientemente= sufficiently, competently

  =sufrir= suffer, stand, endure, allow

  =sujeto= _m._ person, individual, fellow

  =suma= _f._ sum, amount

  =sumar= add;
    amount to, foot up to

  =summa= _see page 93, note 1_

  =summum= _see page 93, note 1_

  =suntuosidad= _f._ sumptuousness, splendor, luxury

  =suntuoso, -a= sumptuous, luxurious

  =sup-e, -iste, -o, -isteis, -ieron=, _see_ =saber=

  =sup-iera, -ieras, -ierais= _see_ =saber=

  =superior= superior, higher

  =supondrás= _see_ =suponer=

  =suponer= suppose, think, imagine

  =supongamos= _see_ =suponer=

  =supongo= _see_ =suponer=

  =suposición= _f._ supposition

  =supremo, -a= supreme, highest

  =suprimir= suppress, overcome

  =supuesto= _m._ assumption;
    =por --= of course

  =supuso= _see_ =suponer=

  =surgir= rise, arise

  =suspender= suspend, stop, cancel, put off

  =suspenso, -a= suspended

  =suspirar= sigh

  =suspiro= _m._ sigh

  =sustituir= substitute, replace

  =susurro= _m._ whisper, murmur, rustle

  =sutil= subtile, fine, slender

  =sutileza= _f._ subtlety, nicety

  =suyo, -a= his, her(s), its, their(s), your(s);
    =el --= his, hers, _etc._;
    =la suya= his, hers, _etc._;
    =los --s= their men, their people


  T

  =Tabarín= _m._ _see page 39, note 4_

  =tabla= _f._ tablet, table;
    =las doce --s= the twelve tables; _see page 94, note 2_

  =tablado= _m._ scaffold, platform

  =tal= such, so, of such a nature;
    =otros --es= the same kind of;
    =-- vez= perhaps

  =talento= _m._ talent, intelligence

  =talión= _m._ talion;
    _see page 100, note 1_

  =también= also, too

  =tambor= _m._ drum

  =tan= so, as, such, such a

  =tanto=, =-a= so much, so great, such, much;
    =tanto= _adv._ so much, much;
    =--s= so many, so great, such;
    =a --s= at such and such a date;
    =-- (... ) como= as much as, the same as, as well
    as; not only... but (also)
    =otro --= the same, just the same;
    =otros --s= just as many;
    =por lo --= therefore;
    =-- tiempo= so long (_a time_);
    =un --= a certain sum;
    =tantas veces= so many times, so often

  =tapia= _f._ wall (_made of mud_)

  =tapiz= _m._ tapestry

  =¡tararí!= (_interj. used to imitate sound of bugle_)

  =tardanza= _f._ tardiness, slowness, delay

  =tardar= be late;
    =-- en= delay in, be long in, take a long time to;
    =--sele a uno en= long to;
    =se me tarda en= I long to

  =tarde= _f._ afternoon, evening;
    =ayer por la --= yesterday afternoon

  =tarde= _adv._ late;
    =más --= later

  =¡tarí!= (_interj. used to imitate sound of bugle_)

  =tarjeta= _f._ card

  =te= you, to you, yourself

  =teatro= _m._ theater, stage, drama, theatrical production;
    =-- de la Comedia=, =-- Lara=, =-- de la Princesa=,
    =-- Real= _see pages 107, 113, 117, and page 5, note 3_

  =tejer= weave

  =telón= _m._ curtain (_of a theater_);
    =-- corto= drop curtain

  =tema= _m._ theme

  =temblar= tremble

  =temer= fear

  =temor= _m._ fear

  =temporada= _f._ season, spell, time

  =temprano= early

  =ten= _see_ =tener=

  =tendencia= _f._ tendency

  =tender= extend, stretch, spread out;
    =-- a= have the effect of

  =tendr-é, -ás, -á, -éis, -án= _see_ =tener=

  =tendr-ía, -ías, -íais, -ían= _see_ =tener=

  =teneos= (=tened= + =os=)

  =tener= have, hold, keep;
    =-- tanto afán= be so eager;
    =-- cuenta= bear in mind;
    =-- en cuenta= take into consideration;
    =-- cuidado= take care, be careful;
    =-- mucho cuidado= be very careful;
    =-- más edad= be older;
    =-- envidia a= be envious or jealous of;
    =--lo a gloria= consider it a great honor;
    =-- ocasión= have the opportunity;
    =-- que= have to, must;
    =no -- nada que decir= have nothing to say;
    =-- que ver= have to do;
    =¿qué tiene que ver Pepe?= what has Pepe to do with it?
    what business is it of Pepe's?
    =¡tendría que ver!= that would be a fine thing!
    =¿qué tienes?= what's the matter with you?
    =no -- por qué= have no reason to;
    =-- queja de= have a complaint to make of;
    =-- razón= be right;
    =-- más razón= be more correct;
    =-- mucha razón= be quite right;
    =-- por seguro= consider it certain, be sure, rest assured;
    =--se= stop, halt

  =teng-a, -as, -áis= _see_ =tener=

  =tengo= _see_ =tener=

  =tensión= _f._ tension

  =tercer(o), -a= third

  =terciopelo= _m._ velvet

  =terminar= terminate, end

  =término= _m._ term, boundary;
    =primer --= foreground, front (_of the stage_), _see page 39, note 1_

  =terquedad= _f._ obstinacy

  =testarudo, -a= stubborn, hard-headed

  =testigo= _m._ witness

  =testimonio= _m._ testimony

  =texto= _m._ text

  =ti= (_after prepositions_) you

  =tiembla= _see_ =temblar=

  =tiembles= _see_ =temblar=

  =tiempo= _m._ time, weather;
    =al= (_or_ =en=) =poco --= in a short time;
    =a su --= in their turn, at the proper time;
    =mucho --= a long time;
    =hace mucho --= a long time ago;
    =tanto --= so long (_a time_)

  =tienda= _f._ store, shop

  =tiende= _see_ =tender=

  =tien-es, -e, -en= _see_ =tener=

  =tierra= _f._ earth, land;
    =correr --= rove over the world

  =timbre= _m._ bell

  =timidez= _f._ timidity, shyness

  =tímido, -a= timid, bashful, shy

  =tinglado= _m._ shed, scaffolding

  =tino= _m._ skill, judgment;
    =sin --= without judgment, foolishly, absurdly, illogically

  =tío= _m._ uncle

  =tipo= _m._ type

  =tiranía= _f._ tyranny

  =tiránico, -a= tyrannical

  =tirar= pull;
    =-- de= pull by

  =tocar= touch;
    play (_an instrument_);
    =--le a uno= fall to
  one's lot;
    be _or_ come one's turn;
    =nos toca el turno= our turn comes

  =todavía= still, yet, nevertheless, all the same

  =todo, -a= all, every, whole;
    =todo= _pron._ everything, anything;
    =--s= all, everybody, anybody;
    =--s los= every;
    =-- el día= the whole day;
    =-- el mundo= everybody;
    =-- un= a whole;
    =-- un hombre= a grown man;
    =a todas horas= all the time;
    =ante --= above all, first of all;
    =-- lo posible= everything possible;
    =-- lo que= everything _or_ anything that, whatever;
    =sobre --= above all, especially

  =toilette= _f._ (_Fr._) toilet, dress

  =tolerancia= _f._ tolerance

  =tolerante= tolerant

  =tolerar= tolerate

  =tomar= take;
    =-- por su cuenta= take upon oneself, take charge of;
    =--la con= contradict, blame, criticize;
    =-- en serio= take seriously;
    =toma y daca= give and take

  =tomo= _m._ volume

  =tono= _m._ tone, shade

  =tontería= _f._ foolishness, folly, nonsense;
    =--s= tomfooleries, nonsense

  =tonto= _m._ fool

  =torpe= dull, stupid

  =torpeza= _f._ stupidity, piece of stupidity;
    =--s= pieces of stupidity, stupidity

  =tozudez= _f._ obstinacy

  =trabajar= work, labor

  =trabajo= _m._ work, labor, toil

  =tracemos= _see_ =trazar=

  =traducir= translate

  =traer= bring, carry;
    =-- a mano= carry by hand

  =traficante= _m._ merchant, trader, bargainer

  =trágico, -a= tragic

  =traición= _f._ treachery

  =traigo= _see_ =traer=

  =traje= _m._ dress, costume

  =traje-ron= _see_ =traer=

  =trajinante= _m._ carter (_humble traveler or huckster_)

  =traj-o, -eron= _see_ =traer=

  =tramar= plot, contrive

  =trance= _m._ plight, situation, peril

  =tranquilidad= _f._ tranquillity

  =tranquilizar= pacify, reassure, quiet

  =tranquilo, -a= tranquil, calm

  =transcendental= transcendental

  =transeúnte= _m._ passer-by

  =transformación= _f._ transformation

  =transformar= transform, change

  =transigir= compromise

  =trapisonda= _f._ snare, deception

  =trapo= _m._ rag, tatter

  =tras= after, behind

  =trascender= transcend, go beyond limits

  =trasciende= _see_ =trascender=

  =tratar= treat, deal with, have dealings with;
    =-- de= try, endeavor;
    =--se de= be a question of, concern;
    =tratándose de usted= when it concerns you

  =trato= _m._ intercourse

  =través de, a= across, through

  =travesura= _f._ prank, trick, mischief

  =trazar= trace, outline

  =tregua= _f._ truce, respite;
    =dar -- a= give a rest to, stop using

  =treinta= thirty

  =tremendo, -a= terrible

  =trepar= climb

  =tres= three

  =tresillo= _m._ tresillo (_a game of cards_)

  =Triberiano= _see page 94, note 3_

  =Triboniano= Tribonian; _see page 94, note 3_

  =tribulación= _f._ tribulation, trial

  =triste= sad, dreary

  =tristeza= _f._ sadness, melancholy

  =triunfante= triumphant

  =triunfar= triumph

  =triunfo= _m._ triumph, victory

  =trono= _m._ throne

  =tropel= _m._ crowd, horde

  =tropezar con= stumble upon, come upon, run into, meet

  =truhán= _m._ rascal, knave

  =truhanería= _f._ rascality

  =tu= your

  =tú= you

  =turbar= disturb

  =Turco= _m._ Turk;
    =el Gran Turco= the Great Turk, the Sultan

  =turco, -a= Turkish

  =túrdiga= _f._ strip of hide, strip

  =turno= _m._ turn;
    =tercer --= _see page 5, note 5_

  =tuv-iera, -ieras= _see_ =tener=

  =tuvo= _see_ =tener=

  =tuyo, -a= yours, of yours;
    =el tuyo=, =la tuya=, _etc._ yours


  U

  =u= (_before_ =o= _or_ =ho=) or

  =¡uf!= oh! (_interj. indicating annoyance_)

  =ufanarse con= pride oneself on, take pride in

  =ufano, -a= proud, exultant

  =último, -a= last, final

  =un=, =una= a, an, one;
    =unos, -as= some, a few, about;
    =unos cuantos= some, certain;
    _see_ =uno=

  =unánime= unanimous

  =único, -a= only, single, sole;
    =lo --= the only thing

  =unir= unite, join, attach, fasten

  =uno, -a= one;
    one, people, we, _etc._;
    =--s= some, a few;
    =cada --= each one;
    =contentos el -- del otro= pleased with each other;
    =-- por --= one by one;
    _see_ =un=

  =urgente= urgent, important

  =uso= _m._ use

  =usted= you

  =usual= usual

  =utilizar= use


  V

  =v-as, -a, -amos, -ais, -an= _see_ =ir=

  =vacilar= vacillate, hesitate

  =vagar= wander

  =vais= _see_ =ir=

  =valer= be worth, be valuable, avail, be of use, be of value, protect, help;
    =no -- nada= be worth nothing, be worthless;
    =-- la pena= be worth the trouble, be worth while;
    =--se= help oneself, protect oneself;
    =--se de= make use of, use;
    =¡válgame vuestra espada!= may your sword avail _or_ protect me!
    =¡valedme!= protect _or_ help me!

  =valga= _see_ =valer=

  =valgo= _see_ =valer=

  =valiente= valiant, brave

  =valimiento= _m._ value, advantage, protection;
    =persona de --= person of influence

  =valor= _m._ value, worth;
    valor, courage

  =vamos= _see_ =ir=

  =van= _see_ =ir=

  =vanidad= _f._ vanity

  =vanidoso, -a= vain, conceited

  =vano, -a= vain, empty

  =variado, -a= varied, heterogeneous

  =vas= _see_ =ir=

  =vay-a, -as, -amos, -an= _see_ =ir=

  =ve= (_imper._) _see_ =ir=

  =ve-a, -amos, -áis, -an= _see_ =ver=

  =veces= _see_ =vez=

  =veinte= twenty

  =veinticinco= twenty-five

  =veintitantos, -as= twenty odd

  =vejez= _f._ old age, age

  =ven= _see_ =venir=

  =vencer= conquer, overcome, defeat

  =vender= sell, barter

  =vendr-á, -án= _see_ =venir=

  =vendríais= _see_ =venir=

  =Venecia= _f._ Venice

  =veng-a, -an= _see_ =venir=

  =venganza= _f._ vengeance, revenge

  =vengo= _see_ =venir=

  =veníos= (=venid= + =os=)

  =venir= come;
    =-- a= come to;
    =-- a ser= come to be, become;
    =ir y --= come and go, go to and fro;
    =--se= come

  =ventaja= _f._ advantage

  =ventajoso, -a= advantageous, profitable

  =ventana= _f._ window

  =ventura= _f._ fortune, good fortune, chance;
    =por --= by chance

  =veo= _see_ =ver=

  =ver= see, watch;
    =vamos a --= let's see;
    =tener que --= have to do;
    =¿qué tiene que ver Pepe?= what has Pepe to do with it?
    what business is it of Pepe's?
    =¡tendría que ver!= that would be a fine thing!
    =--se= see oneself, see each other, be

  =veraneo= _m._ summering;
    =viajes de --= summer trips

  =verano= _m._ summer;
    =el -- pasado= last summer

  =veras= _f. pl._ truth, reality;
    =de --= in truth, really;
    =ir de --= be serious

  =verdad= _f._ truth, true state;
    true;
    =de --= really, genuinely;
    =la --= in truth;
    =no es --= it _or_ that isn't true;
    =con toda --= in very truth, in all seriousness

  =verdaderamente= really, truly

  =verdadero, -a= true, real, genuine

  =verdugo= _m._ executioner

  =vergonzoso, -a= ashamed, shy, modest, bashful

  =verso= _m._ verse

  =vestido= _m._ dress, garment, clothes

  =vestir= dress;
    =vestido de= dressed in

  =vete= (=ve= [_from_ =ir=] + =te=)

  =vez= _f._ time, occasion;
    =a veces= at times;
    =alguna --= occasionally, now and then;
    =algunas veces= sometimes;
    =cada -- que= every time that, whenever;
    =¡cuántas veces!= how many times! how often!
    =de -- en cuando= from time to time;
    =dos veces= twice;
    =en -- de= instead of;
    =más veces= on more occasions, more often;
    =muchas veces= many times, often;
    =otra --= another time, again;
    =otras veces= at other times;
    =por primera --= for the first time;
    =tal --= perhaps;
    =tantas veces= so many times, so often;
    =una --= once;
    =de una --= once for all;
    =para una -- que= on one occasion that, for once when

  =viaje= _m._ voyage, journey, trip

  =vianda= _f._ food;
    =--s= victuals, food

  =viandante= _m._ traveler

  =victoria= _f._ victory

  =vida= _f._ life, living;
    =¡por -- que!= + _vb._ by my life!
    =¡por vuestra --!= by your life!

  =vidrio= _m._ glass

  =viejo, -a= old;
    =el --= the old man;
    =los --s= old people

  =viene= _see_ =venir=

  =vigilancia= _f._ vigilance

  =villanamente= villainously

  =villano= _m._ rustic, countryman

  =vin-e, -iste, -o= _see_ =venir=

  =vinieran= _see_ =venir=

  =vino= _m._ wine

  =violencia= _f._ violence

  =violento, -a= violent

  =violeta= _f._ violet

  =virtud= _f._ virtue

  =virtuoso, -a= virtuous

  =visible= visible

  =visión= _f._ vision, perspective

  =visita= _f._ visit, call;
    =estar de --= be paying a visit, be calling

  =viso= _m._ gleam, appearance, color

  =vista= _f._ sight, vision, view;
    =a -- de= in sight of;
    =en -- de= in view of;
    =corto de --= shortsighted, nearsighted;
    =perder de --= lose sight of

  =visto= _see_ =ver=

  =viudo= _m._ widower

  =vivir= live, dwell;
    =¡viva... != long live... !

  =vivo, -a= alive, living, lively;
    =de lo -- a lo pintado= between life and painting

  =vocabulario= _m._ vocabulary

  =voces= _see_ =voz=

  =volar= fly, soar

  =volumen= _m._ volume

  =voluntad= _f._ will, pleasure

  =volver= return, come back, go back;
    make, render;
    =-- a= + _inf._ (do something) again;
    =-- en sí= return to oneself _or_ to one's senses;
    =--se= turn

  =vos= you

  =vosotros, -as= you

  =votar= vote

  =voto= _m._ vow, oath;
    =¡--a!= I'll swear! good heavens!

  =voy= _see_ =ir=

  =voz= _f._ voice, cry

  =vuela= _see_ =volar=

  =vuelta= _f._ turn, return;
    sleeve cuff, facing

  =vuelto= _see_ =volver=

  =vuelv-as, -a, -an= _see_ =volver=

  =vuelv-es, -en= _see_ =volver=

  =vuestro, -a= your, yours, of yours;
    =el vuestro=, =la vuestra=, _etc._ yours

  =vulgar= vulgar, common, ordinary


  W

  =Walkyria= (=la=) _f._ the Valkyries (_an opera of Wagner;
    Spanish uses the singular_)


  Y

  =y= and

  =ya= already, now, indeed, surely, of course, soon;
    =-- no= no longer;
    =-- que= now that

  =yerno= _m._ son-in-law

  =yo= I


  Z

  =zorro= _m._ fox





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Heath's Modern Language Series: Tres
Comedias, by Jacinto Benavente

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HEATH'S MODERN LANGUAGE ***

***** This file should be named 28106-8.txt or 28106-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/8/1/0/28106/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Chuck Greif and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
