The Project Gutenberg EBook of Rafael Cordero, by Salvador Brau

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Rafael Cordero
       Elogio Póstumo

Author: Salvador Brau

Release Date: January 16, 2013 [EBook #41853]

Language: Spanish

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RAFAEL CORDERO ***




Produced by Carlos Colon and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)







Notas del Transcriptor:

Texto en letras itálicas se denota con _líneas_ y texto enegrecido se
denota con =signos de igual=.

Errores obvios de imprenta han sido corregidos.

Páginas en blanco han sido eliminadas




  SALVADOR BRAU

  RAFAEL CORDERO

  ELOGIO PÓSTUMO

  con que se iniciara en el Ateneo Puertorriqueño la velada del 31 de
  octubre de 1891

  PUERTO RICO

  TIPOGRAFÍA DE ARTURO CORDOVA

  1891




  A LA MEMORIA

  DEL ACTO MERITÍSIMO REALIZADO POR LOS ILUSTRES REPÚBLICOS

  D. SEGUNDO RUIZ BELVIS, D. JOSÉ JULIAN ACOSTA Y D. FRANCISCO MARIANO
  QUIÑONES


  al solicitar de la Metrópoli, en noviembre de 1866, la reintegración
  de la raza negra en sus humanos derechos,

    consagro esta siempreviva, perfumada con las sublimes virtudes de un
    negro humanitario.


        Salvador Brau.


  Puerto Rico, octubre 31 de 1891




SEÑORES:


Una vez más nos congrega en este recinto consagrado á la cultura del
espíritu, el sentimiento de gratitud social. La Directiva del Ateneo ha
querido solemnizar con una fiesta literaria la instalación en sus
salones del retrato de un compatriota benemérito, el virtuoso Rafael
Cordero, legado á la contemplación de la posteridad por el pincel de
otro puertorriqueño distinguido y generoso: el señor don Francisco
Oller.

Ese retrato figurará dignamente, desde hoy, en la galería que ilustran
el Padre Rufo, Campeche, Tapia, Gautier Benítez, Corchado y Tavárez, y
en la que en breve ocupará puesto de honor el venerable Acosta, el grave
y experimentado maestro de cuya ausencia no nos hemos consolado todavía,
y cuya voz, muda para siempre, ha de apreciarse como nota de
deficiencia en este acto.

Afortunado iniciador, en las columnas de EL CLAMOR DEL PAÍS, del
propósito que hoy se traduce en hecho consumado, mediante popular
donativo que engrosaron con su óbolo todas las clases sociales del país
y algunos compatriotas residentes en la Metrópoli, complázcome en dar
voz al agradecimiento de que me reconozco deudor por tan eficacísima
cooperación.

Ese agradecimiento comprende á los respetables señores que forman la
Directiva del Ateneo y en especial á su Presidente, mi querido amigo don
Manuel Elzaburu, por la indiscutible acogida que prestaron al propósito,
apenas enunciado, identificándose en absoluto con la idea, como se ha
identificado su actual vicepresidente, el señor don Enrique Alvarez
Pérez, gustosísimo patrocinador de esta solemnidad.

Y fuerza es que haga extensivos esos sentimientos de gratitud á la
prensa periódica; á esa prensa en cuyas filas tengo el honor de militar
y cuyos órganos, sin distinción de escuela, han contribuido á mover los
entusiasmos públicos en pro de esta ofrenda, que á la virtud modesta y
al mérito reconocido consagramos, no por voluntad de uno, no por
sentimiento de varios, sino por sentimiento y voluntad de los elementos
individuales que constituyen nuestra sociedad, cuya alteza espiritual,
cuya fraternidad culta y vivificadora recibe espléndida sanción en estos
instantes.

Porque no se trata de honrar la memoria de un compatriota favorecido con
la inspiración maravillosa del arte, decorado con los atributos
nobilísimos de la ciencia ó ceñido con los laureles de una popularidad
legítimamente adquirida en defensa de cívicos derechos. Se trata de un
artesano humildísimo; de un artesano procedente de esa raza laboriosa
privada hasta ayer de su libertad individual por errores que ha
rectificado la acción de los tiempos: se trata de un negro tabaquero. Y
cuando á ese negro humilde colocamos, en materia de veneración pública,
á la altura del doctor don Rufo Manuel Fernández, el canónigo gallego
para quien sólo bendiciones guarda nuestra historia regional, preciso
será reconocer la grandiosidad de los méritos del venerado, pero
reconociendo á la vez la transformación radical operada en nuestras
ideas sociales á impulsos del progreso avasallador.

No entraña este reconocimiento improbable suposición, Veinte y tres años
ha que un miembro de la Sociedad Económica de amigos del país--don José
Estéban Ramos--solicitó para el retrato del Maestro Rafael Cordero honor
análogo á éste que el Ateneo le acuerda, y la Sociedad Económica que
había adjudicado un premio pecuniario á la virtud del septuagenario
artesano; esa Sociedad que le había considerado acreedor al título de
_socio de mérito_, accedió á la solicitud.... dejando en suspenso sus
efectos.

Esto se explica por el estado social del país, del que necesariamente he
de ocuparme, siquiera á grandes rasgos, para demostrar á las
generaciones nuevas, á los conterráneos bisoños, á los huéspedes de la
víspera que sólo por referencias tradicionales ó históricas han de poder
apreciar la contextura étnica de nuestro regionalismo, cual es la
trascendencia de este acto, que patrocina el Ateneo, pero al que toda
esta brillante concurrencia presta cumplidísima cooperación.

       *       *       *       *       *

Desde los instaladores comienzos de la colonia subdividióse la sociedad
puertorriqueña en dos castas: blanca y negra; señora la una, sierva la
otra; oriunda aquella de las regiones hesperias, de antiguo vigorizadas
por el derecho romano y la moral evangélica; originaria la otra de esos
territorios africanos donde aún tropieza con obstáculos insuperables el
carro luminoso de la universal civilización. De esta última procedía el
Maestro Rafael.

Hijo de Lucas Cordero, artesano de esta capital, y de Rita Molina,
natural de Arecibo, por más que el estado matrimonial de éstos pruebe la
condición de _libres_ que les asistía, y que acaso disfrutaron sus
antecesores, es innegable que el prejuicio de casta debía subsistir para
ellos, puesto que doblemente cimentado se hallaba en general por las
leyes y las costumbres. Es por esto que ha de atribuirse al estado
social del país la dificultad ofrecida, en 1868, á la colocación del
retrato del obscuro menestral en la sala de sesiones de la Real
Sociedad Económica.

Y, sin embargo, es el medio social en que se dilatara la actividad
benéfica del Maestro Rafael, el que valora con opulentas cifras la
elevación apostólica de sus humanitarias virtudes.

Nació en octubre de 1790, es decir, veinte y cinco años después de haber
visitado á Puerto Rico, en calidad de Comisario régio, el mariscal de
campo don Alejandro O'Reylly y de haber consignado en la "Memoria acerca
de su visita" que en la isla había no más que dos escuelas: _una en
Puerto Rico y otra en San Germán, fuera de cuyos puntos pocas personas
sabían leer_. Entre esas pocas personas hay que colocar al maestro Lucas
y á su consorte que se ejercitaban, voluntaria y gratuitamente, en
transmitir sus escasos conocimientos á niños de ámbos sexos.

Podrá extrañarse por alguno que hallándose tan limitada, en 1790, la
instrucción primaria, entre las clases superiores de Puerto Rico,
existiesen negros aptos para transmitirla por espontáneo y caritativo
impulso; mas á esa extrañeza cabe responder, recordando que tampoco
había en la isla, por aquella época, escuelas de dibujo y pintura, y ya
las vírgenes de José Campeche, también sometido á las preocupaciones de
casta, alcanzaban notoriedad al pincel que debía perpetuar la memoria
del general don Ramón de Castro y la popular hazaña en que hubo de
figurar aquel caudillo.

Que las facultades naturales de la inteligencia necesitan factores
auxiliares para su desarrollo, es innegable. Donde hallaron ese auxilio
los padres de Rafael Cordero no lo dicen las crónicas; pero el hijo hubo
de encontrarlo en el hogar doméstico. Allí adquirió sus modestos
conocimientos y el hábito de transmitirlos; hábito que ejercitó con
verdadera vocación, conciliándolo con el oficio sedentario de tabaquero,
elegido para ganar el necesario sustento, y practicado asíduamente
durante su vida; aún después de haber sido nombrado, oficialmente,
_maestro incompleto_ en 1865, por hallarse comprendido en las
prescripciones del Decreto reformador de la enseñanza pública que
autorizara el general Messina.

En 1810, esto es con una anterioridad de treinta y cinco años á la
organización oficial de la enseñanza primaria, no abordada hasta 1845
por el Gobierno Superior de la isla, instaló su escuela de párvulos
gratuita el Maestro Rafael, manteniéndola, sin interrupción, hasta julio
de 1868 en que ocurrió su fallecimiento. Lectura, caligrafía, doctrina
cristiana y conocimientos numéricos comprendía el programa de aquella
escuela: programa reducidísimo, pero valioso por la conciencia que
presidía su aplicación.

--"Yo _tumbo_ el árbol y lo descortezo;--cuentan que solía decir--manos
más hábiles que las mías se encargarán de labrar la madera y darle
barníz."

¡En cincuenta y ocho años de magisterio, qué de árboles tan variados y
robustos descortezó!

Durante cincuenta y ocho años se agruparon al pié de aquella mesa de
tabaquero, convertida en cátedra de instrucción pública por la intuición
maravillosa de un espíritu privilegiado, generaciones sucesivas de
hombres que debían dar lustre á las letras patrias, elevarse á las altas
dignidades del sacerdocio y la milicia, conquistar puesto prominente en
las ciencias ó revestirse con el título de legisladores nacionales.

Las diversas aptitudes de esos hombres adquirieron cumplido desarrollo
en vastos círculos de enseñanza, pero la base fundamental de su
instrucción se inculcó bajo la férula del Maestro Rafael Cordero; bajo
la acción educadora de aquel rebenque á que ha consagrado filial
recuerdo el doctor don Francisco del Valle Atiles, uno de los más
jóvenes asistentes al aula.

¡Contraste singular el que ofrece ese rebenque simbólico á la
observación del analista! Porque el régimen de la colonia establecía la
pena de azotes como correctivo á la holganza ó los vicios del esclavo, y
era precisamente el azote la expresión suprema de la severidad escolar
que el Maestro Rafael dejaba sentir á sus discípulos rebeldes ó
desaplicados. El mismo castigo que excitaba el fomento de la riqueza
material en el ingenio, rebajando y encalleciendo el espíritu, daba
acicate, en el taller-escuela, á las facultades intelectuales tardas ó
adormecidas. ¡El azote que enseñaba al negro á cultivar la caña y á
cristalizar el azúcar, esgrimido por un negro, enseñaba al blanco á
deletrear el castellano y á balbucir el _Padre nuestro_!

Verdad que el rebenque del Maestro Rafael no abrió nunca sanguinoso
surco en las carnes de sus discípulos. Jamás hubo de formularse una
protesta paternal contra el rigor de aquellos castigos: léjos de ello, á
solicitar su aplicación solían acudir algunas madres obreras, á las
horas del aula, por consecuencia de grave rebeldía infantil ó pecaminoso
callejeo filial tras de las músicas militares ó de las distracciones más
peligrosas del _hoyuelo_ y la _raya_. Y es fama que, una vez formulada
la queja materna, con sumaria diligencia se substanciaba el proceso, y
ordenado el descenso de las menudas bragas ó el ascenso de la flotante
camisola del acusado, allí mismo, á claustro pleno, se le propinaba el
número de rebencazos determinados en la escala gradual establecida por
la trimurti pedagógica que compendiaba al legislador prudente, al juez
íntegro y al ejecutor de justicia metódico é impasible, en una sola
personalidad.

Es así que las azotainas del Maestro Rafael no trasponían los lindes de
la previsora rigidéz paternal, creciendo á compás de ellas el cariño de
sus alumnos de una y otra clase. Y digo de una y otra, porque en aquella
escuela de la calle de la Luna, se distribuía el gérmen fecundo de
cristiana enseñanza lo mismo al primogénito de un linajudo Oidor de la
Real Audiencia que al hijo de un rudo mozo de carga adscrito á las
faenas del muelle; así se educaba allí al descendiente de un Saint Just,
el veterano glorioso de Bailén, como al nieto desarrapado de lavandera
anónima.

El privilegio de la casta se anulaba democráticamente á los piés del
crucifijo que iluminaba con sus redentoras fulguraciones aquella pobre
escuela. El _sinite parvulos venire ad me_ del Evangelio nivelaba las
categorías sociales de la colonia, ante el ara de aquel santuario
reconstituido por la inspiración artística de Oller, en ese cuadro
ofrecido á la consideración pública, sin presentir acaso que trasladaba
al lienzo, con sus peculiarísimas tintas, no un episodio local, sino
accidente tan íntimo como extenso de nuestra regional historia.

Si, señores; bueno es decirlo á los que tengan motivo para ignorarlo. En
materia de igualdad cristiana, la escuela del Maestro Rafael puede
considerarse como tipo modelo de todas las de su época en Puerto Rico.
El régimen de la colonia que autorizaba la servidumbre corporal de los
obreros de color, no negaba el beneficio de la instrucción á los
manumisos. A los bancos de las rudimentarias escuelas públicas no
llegaban las subdivisiones de casta: blancos y negros, confundidos,
aprendían el catecismo y la gramática; y tal exactitud entraña esta
afirmación, que no necesito rebuscar mucho en los rincones de la
memoria, para encontrar el nombre de algunos descendientes de esclavos á
quienes tuve por condiscípulos en la escuela de mi pueblo natal, en el
período comprendido desde 1849 á 1854.

Igual solidaridad enlazaba las aspiraciones del estudio que la
disciplina escolar, y las distinciones estimuladoras que la Academia
Real de buenas letras concedía anualmente, influidas eran por las
pruebas de exámen no por el _pigmentum_ que coloraba la epidérmis de los
alumnos.

El período estudiantil terminaba; el niño, transformado en hombre,
lanzábase á los combates de la vida, ocupando el sitio que la suerte le
concediera: el menestral empuñaba el tirapiés ó la garlopa, el doctor se
ajustaba la muceta, ascendia al altar el sacerdote, el militar se
ufanaba con el áureo uniforme; las divisorias líneas sociales se
mantenían escrupulosamente; pero detrás de ellas sentíase aletear el
espíritu de confraternidad, generado sobre los deslucidos bancos
escolares al amparo de la religión y de las leyes.

En la escuela de Rafael Cordero debió acentuarse ese fenómeno por la
condición individual del maestro, que él supo mantener dentro de
estrechísimos límites, obedeciendo á la sencilléz exquisita de sus
sentimientos, informados por la más ardiente caridad.

El ejercicio de esa virtud humanitaria compendia la vida de Cordero con
exclusivismo absoluto, blanqueando su téz de ébano con las nitideces del
lirio; de ese lirio de nuestras sabanas incultas, que brota con
espontaneidad inconsciente, embelleciendo los cardos que le constriñen
y embalsamando el aire que le azotó.

Casto y sobrio, laborioso y humilde, austero y benévolo, ese obrero de
mano callosa y alma de ángel antepone el bien de sus semejantes á todos
los mundanos afectos. La Sociedad Económica le adjudica en un certámen
de la virtud premio de cien pesos; él, que no cuenta con otros recursos
materiales para subsistir que su modesta labor de tabaquero, rechaza el
premio; obligado á aceptarlo, distribuye la mitad entre sus alumnos
menesterosos de ropa y de libros, y riega la otra mitad, como semilla de
bendiciones, entre pordioseros, convocados por medio de sus discípulos,
convidados á aquel sublime banquete de la caridad.

Su jornal es mezquino y con él ha de atender al cuidado de hermana
infelíz privada de razón, que no se siente con valor para confiar á la
beneficencia oficial. El presupuesto familiar, sobrado exíguo, se
constriñe aún más por esas exigencias fraternales y no puede tolerar
extraordinarios dispendios; sin embargo, acierta un mendigo famélico á
implorar alimento en aquella escuela á horas del desayuno, y el
maestro, juzgando mezquina su colación para dos, la adjudica toda al
necesitado.

Un dia llega á manos de Cordero el título de _Maestro imcompleto_ que le
concede el Gobierno, con la asignación de quince pesos mensuales. Ya es
funcionario municipal, después de haberlo sido voluntario y gratuito
durante cincuenta y cinco años. El cambio no le altera; acepta la
asignación, merced á las reflexiones de los amigos que le recuerdan su
ancianidad; pero mantiene inalterables sus hábitos, sin modificar
siquiera la sencilla vestimenta, sólo engalanada con la chaqueta de
menestral al asistir al templo, admitiendo entonces, como testimonio de
religioso respeto, lo que, como prenda innecesaria, rechazaba en los
demás actos de la vida común.

Tales eran los ejemplos prácticos que á sus discípulos ofrecía el
Maestro Rafael. Con los _árboles humanos_ que así descortezó, se
labraron en Europa médicos, abogados, literatos, profesores en ciencias,
sacerdotes, hacendistas y militares. Y él los veía regresar á la tierra
nativa, con la dulce satisfacción del padre que se goza en el adelanto
de sus hijos, pero sin mostrar envanecimientos por su obra; tratándolos
con afecto análogo al de aquellas nodrizas esclavas que nos tutearon en
la cuna cuando niños, y _niños_ siguieron llamándonos respetuosamente, á
pesar de nuestros cabellos grises.

_Alejandro_ llamaba el Maestro Rafael al biógrafo de Campeche y de
Power; _Román_ decíale al futuro constituyente de 1869, tratándolos á
ellos y á sus demás discípulos, con la misma familiar sencilléz que los
tratara en la escuela. Y ellos le correspondían con tan filial respeto,
que aún se recuerda al coronel Espino, prescidiendo de su militar
temperamento y de su autoritarismo de corregidor, para contestar
al--"_¡Adiós Cayetano!_" del anciano obrero, llevando la mano al
jipijapa y repitiéndo la frase sacramental de la escuela:--_La
bendición, maestro_.

¡Qué de recuerdos no surgirían en la mente del veterano _cristino_,
evocados por esa frase cabalística! ¡Dejadme á mi vez que los evoque!
¡Evocadlos también vosotros, viajeros de la vida que doblásteis ya _el
cabo de las tormentas!_ Repasad las notas íntimas de vuestro libro de
memorias, y no vacileis en reconstruir con ellas todo el pasado
colonial, con sus errores, tristezas, olvidos, soledades y desconsuelos,
pues que por sobre aquel montón de cenizas destella, y destellará
siempre, el sentimiento de concordia que vivificó á nuestra sociedad y
que tuvo en el Maestro Rafael acabadísimo intérprete.

Asistidos de ese sentimiento, bien pudieron los ilustres informadores de
1866 reclamar de la hidalga Metrópoli la dignificación del trabajo en
nuestra colonia, reivindicando para toda la raza negra los derechos
naturales inherentes á la humana personalidad.

Es por ese sentimiento, tan arraigado en Puerto Rico, que se explica el
éxito maravilloso obtenido por aquel Decreto redentor de 1873 que
inmortaliza á la Asamblea Nacional española y que sólo cánticos de
júbilo y religiosas preces de gratitud despertara en nuestro pueblo.

Esa concordia en las voluntades, esa harmonía en los afectos, esa
reciprocidad en los servicios, esos respetos mútuos que fincan su
abolengo en las necesidades impuestas á los viejos colonos de esta
comarca por el aislamiento social á que se vieron reducidos, ha llegado
á constituir cualidad característica de nuestro temperamento, espíritu
peculiar y propio de la región, aliento de gigante que la confortó en
los dias de prueba y la condujo al grado de desenvolvimiento culto que
hoy muestra y de que este acto da cumplida fé.

Procuremos cultivar esos afectos; esforcémonos en hacerlos reverdecer;
¡qué no mueran, no! ya que gracias á ellos la historia de Puerto Rico,
que no enrojece sus páginas con los nombres de un _Toussaint_ ó de un
_Dessalines_, se ilumina con los destellos del espíritu bienhechor de un
Rafael Cordero.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Rafael Cordero, by Salvador Brau

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK RAFAEL CORDERO ***

***** This file should be named 41853-8.txt or 41853-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/1/8/5/41853/

Produced by Carlos Colon and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

