The Project Gutenberg EBook of Esther, by Jean Racine

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Esther

Author: Jean Racine

Editor: I.H.B. Spiers

Release Date: May 7, 2005 [EBook #15790]
[Last updated: February 17, 2012]

Language: French / English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ESTHER ***




Produced by Al Haines










Heath's Modern Language Series.



ESTHER

TRAGÉDIE EN TROIS ACTES


PAR


RACINE.






EDITED, WITH INTRODUCTION, NOTES, AND APPENDICES,

BY

I. H. B. SPIERS,



SENIOR ASSISTANT MASTER WILLIAM PENN CHARTER SCHOOL,

PHILADELPHIA.







D. C. HEATH & CO., PUBLISHERS

BOSTON  NEW YORK  CHICAGO




COPYRIGHT, 1891,

By I. H. B. SPIERS.




PREFACE.

The tragedy of _Esther_ commends itself to moderately advanced students
of the French language by the fact that it is both the easiest and the
shortest masterpiece of French tragic literature.  For such students
the present edition has been prepared.  The text has been modified in
all minor points of spelling and grammar so as to conform with present
usage.  The notes are intended either to make clear such matters of
history or grammar as offer any difficulty, or to emphasize that which
may be especially instructive from a literary, historical, or
grammatical point of view.

The appendix contains, in addition to a brief statement of the rules of
French verse, a systematic presentation of quotations from the play
illustrating a few of the grammatical points on which experience
teaches that the student's knowledge, in spite of grammars, is likely
to be vague.

The editor desires to acknowledge gratefully his indebtedness to M.
Paul Mesnard's exhaustive work in the _Collection des Grands Écrivains
de la France_, published under the direction of M. Ad. Régnier (Paris,
1865), and also to the excellent editions of Mr. G. Saintsbury (Oxford,
1886), and of Prof. E. S. Joynes (New York, 1882).

    I. H. B. SPIERS.


WILLIAM PENN CHARTER SCHOOL, PHILADELPHIA.  INTRODUCTION.

1. LIFE OF RACINE.

Jean Racine, unquestionably the most perfect of the French tragic
poets, was born in 1639, at La Ferté-Milon, near Paris.  He received a
sound classical education at Port-Royal des Champs, then a famous
centre of religious thought and scholastic learning.  At the early age
of twenty he was so fortunate as to attract, by an ode in honor of the
marriage of King Louis XIV., the favor of that exacting monarch,--a
favor which he was to enjoy during forty years.  Yet more fortunate in
the friendship of Molière, of La Fontaine, and especially of his trusty
counsellor, Boileau, he doubtless owed to them his determination to
devote himself to dramatic literature.

His first tragedies to be put upon the stage were _La Thébaïde_ (1664)
and _Alexandre_ (1665), which gave brilliant promise.  In 1667 appeared
_Andromaque_, his first chef-d'oeuvre, which placed him at once in the
very front rank by the side of Corneille.  From that time forth, until
1677, almost each year was marked by a new triumph.  In 1668, he
produced his one comedy, _Les Plaideurs_, a highly successful satire on
the Law Courts, in the vein of the "Wasps" of Aristophanes.  In 1669,
he resumed his tragedies on historical subjects with _Britannicus_,
largely drawn from Tacitus, followed by _Bérénice_ (1670), _Bajazet_
(1672), _Mithridate_ (1673), _Iphigénie_ (1674), and _Phèdre_ (1677),
the last two being inspired by Euripides.

Incensed at a literary and artistic cabal, by which a rival play of
_Phèdre_, by Pradon, was momentarily preferred to his own, Racine now
withdrew from the stage.  Appointed soon after to the not very onerous
post of historiographer to the King, he lived for a period of twelve
years a retired life in the bosom of his family.

In 1689, at the request of Mme. de Maintenon, the secret wife of Louis
XIV., he produced _Esther_, and in 1691, _Athalie_, both drawn from the
Scriptures and intended for private performance only.  Embittered by
the indifference with which the latter tragedy was received,--although
posterity has pronounced it his masterpiece,--Racine definitely gave up
the drama.  He died in 1699, after a few years devoted to his _Histoire
du Règne de Louis XIV._, his death being hastened by grief at having
incurred the King's displeasure on account of a memoir on the misery of
the people, which he wrote at the request of Mme. de Maintenon.

A devoted husband and father, an adroit but sincere courtier, Racine
has won the regard of posterity by his life as well as its admiration
by his literary genius.  As a poet, he was endowed with the purest gift
of expression ever granted to a mind imbued with the works of the
classical writers of Greece and Rome.


2. FRENCH TRAGEDY.

French tragedy is purely a work of art.  It does not claim to mirror
Nature in her infinite complexity; it is the professedly artificial
presentment, in the noblest form, of _character_ unfolding itself by
means of one action, as far as possible in one place, and within the
limits of one day.   It is bound by other formal and conventional
rules: of versification--such as the alternation of masculine and
feminine pairs of rhymes, and of taste--such as the avoidance of all
"doing of deeds" on the stage (e.g., all fighting and dying take place
behind the scenes) and the grouping of the fewest possible secondary
parts around the one central situation.

There are but three names in the front rank of writers of French
tragedy: Corneille (1606-1684), Racine (1639-1699), and Voltaire
(1694-1778).  Their tragic masterpieces cover but one century of time,
from Corneille's _Le Cid_ (1636) to Voltaire's _Mérope_ (1743).  Before
these poets, French tragedy had not reached such a degree of perfection
as to be entitled to an identity of its own; after them and their few
feeble imitators, it was merged into a new form, and, as classical
French tragedy, ceased altogether to be.

Corneille purified both thought and language of the bad taste due to
the prevailing Spanish influence.  He subordinated the actor to the
play, instead of composing, as his predecessors had done, lengthy
monologues for mere histrionic display.  He did away with absurdly
tangled plots, and focussed the interest of tragedy on character.
Tragedy thus purified, he made immortal by the strength and elevation
of his moral teaching.  His principal plays are _Le Cid_ (1636),
_Cinna_ (1639), _Polyeucte_ (1640).

The new tragedy shaped by Corneille, Racine carried to its highest
perfection of form.  Nothing in his plays betokens struggle,
innovation, or effort.  His is the polished finish of ease and
ripeness.  Subtle delineation of the passions, profound tenderness,
faultlessness of style and expression, distinguish him above all
others.  Yet this very perfection of form robs him of some of the
rough, wholesome vigor, which makes Corneille's plays the most healthy
reading in the French language.  Corneille speaks by the mouths of
heroes, Racine speaks by the mouths of men.

Voltaire is only to be placed by their side for the extraordinary
skill, amounting to genius, with which he followed in their footsteps.
We must not look to him for new departures, nor indeed for the lofty
authority of the one, or the harmonious richness of the other.  Yet in
each particular he succeeds, by the force of art, in getting within
measurable distance of his models: his _Zaïre_ (1733) and _Mérope_
(1743) would hardly have been disowned by either.

After Voltaire, new times demanded new methods.  The nineteenth century
reacted against the portraiture of character alone, and required more
complete representation of the action; it called for deeds enacted on
the stage, and not in the slips.  Hence, a new form, with a new name,
_le drame_, has taken exclusive possession of the French tragic stage.


3. PRODUCTION OF "ESTHER."

In the year 1687, Mme. de Maintenon had founded at St. Cyr, in the
vicinity of the royal residence of Versailles, an establishment for the
education of two hundred and fifty girls, belonging to noble families
in reduced circumstances.  To this institution she devoted much of her
time and care.

It was usual, in the latter part of the seventeenth century, to
consider the acting of plays a valuable aid to liberal education,
suitable pieces being often written by the heads of the institutions in
which they were to be performed.  Dissatisfied with the compositions of
Mme. de Brinon, the first superior of St. Cyr, and objecting to the
love-making that held such a large place in the works written for the
public stage, Mme. de Maintenon applied to Racine, requesting him to
write a play that should be entirely suitable for performance by very
young ladies.  The courtier poet could not refuse, and the result was
the play of _Esther_, performed in January, 1689, by pupils of St. Cyr,
not one of whom was over seventeen years of age.

The success of the play was startling.  The king witnessed it
repeatedly, and insisted that all his court and guests should do
likewise.  The performances of _Esther_, at St. Cyr, became great
events for the fashionable society of the day.  This unlooked-for
result was not slow to alarm Mme. de Maintenon: their very success
became a danger for the youthful actresses.  Accordingly, Mme. de
Maintenon discountenanced the resumption of _Esther_ after the first
series of performances was concluded, and she entirely withheld from
public representation the second play, _Athalie_, written by Racine in
the following year for the same purpose.  Subsequently Mme. de
Maintenon banished dramatic performances altogether from St. Cyr; she
concluded it was better to train the _reason_[1] by the _solid_[1]
truths of philosophy than the imagination by the unrealities of
dramatic literature.


4. THE PLAY OF "ESTHER."

The subject of _Esther_ is admirably chosen for the purpose Racine had
in view.  The story of Esther, owing mainly to the noble character of
the queen, is as touching as it is lofty.  The poet found it entirely
in the Bible, which should be read side by side with the play from
beginning to end.  Several inspirations, notably that of the beautiful
prayer in the first act, are drawn from the "Rest of the Book of
Esther," i.e., those chapters which being found only in the Greek, and
neither in the Hebrew nor in the Chaldee MSS., are relegated to the
Apocrypha.

Racine follows the theory of the Abbé de Saci, and takes the Ahasuerus
of Scripture to be the Darius of secular history.  Modern criticism,
however, inclines to see in him neither Darius, nor, as has been
proposed on the authority of the "Rest of the Book of Esther" (xii. 2),
Artaxerxes Longimanus, but Xerxes, the immediate successor of Darius.

The idea of a Chorus is borrowed from the Greeks, as Racine expressly
declared in his preface.  In this play, as in Greek tragedy, the Chorus
comments upon the action as it unfolds itself, and the great interests
at stake lift the poet to lofty heights of lyrical inspiration.  The
lyrics of the chorus, far from being a relapse into the pernicious
practice, prevalent before the time of Corneille, of providing such
passages for the mere display of the actor's ability, are pure chants
and hymns, like the _Cantiques Spirituels_ which Racine composed
subsequently in detached form, and are a highly appropriate ornament to
religious plays such as _Esther_ and _Athalie_.

Of the form into which the poet has cast his materials, it is
impossible to speak too highly.  It is adequate praise to say that the
language, in its perfect simplicity and exquisite beauty, is in keeping
with the elevation of the thought, which is that of the Scriptures
themselves.  Nor should the constructive skill be unnoticed with which
the dramatist has filled in the characters sketched by the Bible; the
humility and grace of Esther's account of her own triumph (ll. 31-80),
the art with which Haman betrays his cruel nature by the very offer of
services he makes  to the queen (ll. 1151-4), the adroitness of the
court he pays to the king (ll. 593-7), and his readiness of resource in
adversity (ll. 1142-67).

The subjoined chronological table will enable the student to follow the
events referred to in the play.

 B. C. 718 Shalmaneser takes the kingdom of Israel captive.
       606 Nebuchadnezzar takes the kingdom of Juda captive.
       606-536 Captivity of the Jews under the Assyrians.
       587 Nebuchadnezzar captures Jerusalem and destroys the temple.
       536 Cyrus, King of Persia, conquers Balthasar, King of Babylon,
           and suffers the Jews to return to their own country.
       529-522 Cambyses II. reigns over Persia.
       522-521 Pseudo-Smerdis  "          "
       521-485 Darius          "          "
       485-465 Xerxes          "          "
       465-425 Artaxerxes Longimanus      "


[1]These words recur most frequently in her later correspondence with
St. Cyr.




  PROLOGUE.

  LA PIETE.

  Du séjour bienheureux de la Divinité
  Je descends dans ce lieu, par la Grace habité.
  L'Innocence s'y plaît, ma compagne éternelle,
  Et n'a point sous les cieux d'asile plus fidèle.
  Ici, loin du tumulte, aux devoirs les plus saints            5
  Tout un peuple naissant est formé par mes mains.
  Je nourris dans son coeur la semence féconde
  Des vertus dont il doit sanctifier le monde.
  Un roi qui me protége, un roi victorieux,
  A commis à mes soins ce dépôt précieux.                     10
  C'est lui qui rassembla ces colombes timides,
  Éparses en cent lieux, sans secours et sans guides.
  Pour elles à sa porte élevant ce palais,
  Il leur y fit trouver l'abondance et la paix.

  Grand Dieu, que cet ouvrage ait place en ta mémoire.        15
  Que tous les soins qu'il prend pour soutenir la gloire
  Soient gravés de ta main au livre où sont écrits
  Les noms prédestinés des rois que tu chéris.
  Tu m'écoutes.  Ma voix ne t'est point étrangère.
  Je suis la Piété, cette fille si chère,                     20
  Qui t'offre de ce roi les plus tendres soupirs.
  Du feu de ton amour j'allume ses desirs.
  Du zèle qui pour toi l'enflamme et le dévore
  La chaleur se répand du couchant à l'aurore.
  Tu le vois tous les jours, devant toi prosterné,            25
  Humilier ce front de splendeur couronné,
  Et confondant l'orgueil par d'augustes exemples,
  Baiser avec respect le pavé de tes temples.
  De ta gloire animé, lui seul de tant de rois
  S'arme pour ta querelle, et combat pour tes droits.         30
  Le perfide intérêt, l'aveugle jalousie
  S'unissent centre toi pour l'affreuse hérésie;
  La discorde en fureur frémit de toutes parts;
  Tout semble abandonner tes sacrés etendards,
  Et l'enfer, couvrant tout de ses vapeurs funèbres,          35
  Sur les yeux les plus saints a jeté ses ténèbres.
  Lui seul, invariable et fondé sur la foi,
  Ne cherche, ne regarde et n'écoute que toi;
  Et bravant du demon l'impuissant artifice,
  De la religion soutient tout l'édifice.                     40
  Grand Dieu, juge ta cause, et déploie aujourd'hui
  Ce bras, ce même bras qui combattait pour lui,
  Lorsque des nations à sa perte animées
  Le Rhin vit tant de fois disperser les armées.
  Des mêmes ennemis je reconnais l'orgueil;                   45
  Ils viennent se briser contre le même écueil.
  Déjà, rompant partout leurs plus fermes barrières,
  Du debris de leurs forts il couvre ses frontières.

  Tu lui donnes un fils prompt à le seconder,
  Qui sait combattre, plaire, obéir, commander;               50
  Un fils qui, comme lui, suivi de la victoire,
  Semble à gagner son coeur borner toute sa gloire,
  Un fils à tous ses vceux avec amour soumis,
  L'éternel désespoir de tous ses ennemis.
  Pareil à ces esprits que ta Justice envoie,                 55
  Quand son roi lui dit: «Pars», il s'élance avec joie,
  Du tonnerre vengeur s'en va tout embraser,
  Et tranquille à ses pieds revient le déposer.

  Mais tandis qu'un grand roi venge ainsi mes injures,
  Vous qui goûtez ici des délices si pures,                   60
  S'il permet à son coeur un moment de repos,
  A vos jeux innocents appelez ce héros.
  Retracez lui d'Esther l'histoire glorieuse,
  Et sur l'impiété la foi victorieuse.

  Et vous, qui vous plaisez aux folles passions               65
  Qu'allument dans vos coeurs les vaines fictions,
  Profanes amateurs de spectacles frivoles,
  Dont l'oreille s'ennuie au son de mes paroles,
  Fuyez de mes plaisirs la sainte austérité.
  Tout respire ici Dieu, la paix, la vérité.                  70




  NOMS DES PERSONNAGES.

  ASSUÉRUS, roi de Perse.
  ESTHER, reine de Perse.
  MARDOCHÉE, oncle d'Esther.
  AMAN, favori d'Assuérus.
  ZARÈS, femme d'Aman.
  HYDASPE, officier du palais intérieur d'Assuérus.
  ASAPH, autre officier d'Assuérus.
  ÉLISE, confidente d'Esther.
  THAMAR, Israélite de la suite d'Esther.
  GARDES DU ROI ASSUÉRUS.
  CHOEUR DE JEUNES FILLES ISRAÉLITES.

  LA PIÉTÉ fait le Prologue.

  La scène est à Suse, dans le palais d'Assuérus.




  ESTHER.

  ACTE PREMIER.

  (_Le théatre représente l'appartement d'Esther_.)



  SCÈNE I.

  ESTHER, ÉLISE.


  ESTHER.

  Est-ce toi, chere Élise?  O jour trois fois heureux!
  Que béni soit le del qui te rend à mes voeux,
  Toi qui de Benjamin comme moi descendue,
  Fus de mes premiers ans la compagne assidue,
  Et qui, d'un même joug souffrant l'oppression,               5
  M'aidais à soupirer les malheurs de Sion.
  Combien ce temps encore est cher à ma mémoire!
  Mais toi, de ton Esther ignorais-tu la gloire?
  Depuis plus de six mois que je te fais chercher,
  Quel climat, quel désert a donc pu te cacher?               10


  ELISE.

  Au bruit de votre mort justement éplorée,
  Du reste des humains je vivais séparée,
  Et de mes tristes jours n'attendais que la fin,
  Quand tout à coup, Madame, un prophète divin:
  «C'est pleurer trop longtemps une mort qui t'abuse,         15
  Lève-toi, m'a-t-il dit, prends ton chemin vers Suse.
  Là tu verras d'Esther la pompe et les honneurs,
  Et sur le trône assis le sujet de tes pleurs.
  Rassure, ajouta-t-il, tes tribus alarmées,
  Sion: le jour approche où le Dieu des armées                20
  Va de son bras puissant faire éclater l'appui;
  Et le cri de son peuple est monté jusqu'à lui.»
  Il dit; et moi, de joie et d'horreur pénétrée,
  Je cours.  De ce palais j'ai su trouver l'entrée.
  O spectacle!  O triomphe admirable à mes yeux,              25
  Digne en effet du bras qui sauva nos aïeux!
  Le fier Assuérus couronne sa captive,
  Et le Persan superbe est aux pieds d'une Juive.
  Par quels secrets ressorts, par quel enchaînement,
  Le Ciel a-t-il conduit ce grand événement?                  30


  ESTHER.

  Peut-être on t'a conté la fameuse disgrâce
  De l'altière Vasthi, dont j'occupe la place,
  Lorsque le Roi, contre elle enflammé de dépit,
  La chassa de son trône, ainsi que de son lit.
  Mais il ne put sitôt en bannir la pensée.                   35
  Vasthi régna longtemps dans son âme offensée.
  Dans ses nombreux États il fallut donc chercher
  Quelque nouvel objet qui l'en pût détacher.
  De l'Inde a l'Hellespont ses esclaves coururent;
  Les filles de l'Égypte à Suse comparurent;                  40
  Celles même du Parthe et du Scythe indompté
  Y briguèrent le sceptre offert à la beauté.
  On m'elevait alors, solitaire et cachée,
  Sous les yeux vigilants du sage Mardochée.
  Tu sais combien je dois à ses heureux secours.              45
  La mort m'avait ravi les auteurs de mes jours;
  Mais lui, voyant en moi la fille de son frère,
  Me tint lieu, chère Élise, et de père et de mère.
  Du triste état des Juifs jour et nuit agité,
  Il me tira du sein de mon obscurité;                        50
  Et sur mes faibles mains fondant leur délivrance,
  Il me fit d'un empire accepter l'espérance.
  A ses desseins secrets tremblante j'obéis.
  Je vins.  Mais je cachai ma race et mon pays.
  Qui pourrait cependant t'exprimer les cabales               55
  Que formait en ces lieux ce peuple de rivales,
  Qui toutes disputant un si grand intérêt,
  Des yeux d'Assuérus attendaient leur arrêt?
  Chacune avait sa brigue et de puissants suffrages:
  L'une d'un sang fameux vantait les avantages;               60
  L'autre, pour se parer de superbes atours,
  Des plus adroites mains empruntait le secours;
  Et moi, pour toute brigue et pour tout artifice,
  De mes larmes au ciel j'offrais le sacrifice.

  Enfin on m'annonça l'ordre d'Assuérus.                      65
  Devant ce fier monarque, Élise, je parus.
  Dieu tient le coeur des rois entre ses mains puissantes.
  Il fait que tout prospère aux âmes innocentes,
  Tandis qu'en ses projets l'orgueilleux est trompé.
  De mes faibles attraits le Roi parut frappé.                70
  Il m'observa longtemps dans un sombre silence;
  Et le Ciel, qui pour moi fit pencher la balance,
  Dans ce temps-là sans doute agissait sur son coeur.
  Enfin, avec des yeux où régnait la douceur:
  «Soyez reine,» dit-il; et dès ce moment même                75
  De sa main sur mon front posa son diadème.
  Pour mieux faire éclater sa joie et son amour,
  Il combla de présents tous les grands de sa cour;
  Et même ses bienfaits, dans toutes ses provinces.
  Invitèrent le peuple aux noces de leurs princes.            80

  Helas! durant ces jours de joie et de festins,
  Quelle était en secret ma honte et mes chagrins!
  «Esther, disais-je, Esther dans la pourpre est assise,
  La moitié de la terre à son sceptre est soumise,
  Et de Jérusalem l'herbe cache les murs!                     85
  Sion, repaire affreux de reptiles impurs,
  Voit de son temple saint les pierres dispersées,
  Et du Dieu d'Israël les fêtes sont cessées!»


  ÉLISE.

  N'avez-vous point au Roi confié vos ennuis?


  ESTHER.

  Le Roi, jusqu'à ce jour, ignore qui je suis.                90
  Celui par qui le ciel règle ma destinée
  Sur ce secret encor tient ma langue enchaînée.


  ÉLISE.

  Mardochée?  Hé! peut-il approcher de ces lieux?


  ESTHER.

  Son amitié pour moi le rend ingénieux.
  Absent, je le consulte; et ses réponses sages               95
  Pour venir jusqu'a moi trouvent mille passages.
  Un père a moins de soin du salut de son fils.
  Déjà même, déjà, par ses secrets avis,
  J'ai découvert au Roi les sanglantes pratiques
  Que formaient contre lui deux ingrats domestiques.         100
  Cependant mon amour pour notre nation
  A rempli ce palais de filles de Sion,
  Jeunes et tendres fleurs, par le sort agitées,
  Sous un ciel étranger comme moi transplantées.
  Dans un lieu séparé de profanes témoins,                   105
  Je mets à les former mon étude et mes soins;
  Et c'est là que, fuyant l'orgueil du diadème,
  Lasse de vains honneurs, et me cherchant moi-même,
  Aux pieds de l'Éternel je viens m'humilier,
  Et goûter le plaisir de me faire oublier.                  110
  Mais a tous les Persans je cache leurs familles.
  Il faut les appeler.  Venez, venez, mes filles,
  Compagnes autrefois de ma captivité,
  De l'antique Jacob jeune postérité.




  SCÈNE II.

  ESTHER, ÉLISE, LE CHOEUR.


  UNE DES ISRAÉLITES _chante derrière le théâtre_.

        Ma soeur, quelle voix nous appelle?                  115


  UNE AUTRE.

      J'en reconnais les agréables sons.
  C'est la Reine.


  TOUTES DEUX.

        Courons, mes soeurs, obéissons,
      La Reine nous appelle:
    Allons, rangeons-nous auprès d'elle.

TOUT LE CHOEUR _entrant sur la scène par plusieurs endroits differents_.


        La Reine nous appelle:                               120
      Allons, rangeons-nous auprès d'elle.


  ÉLISE.

  Ciel! quel nombreux essaim d'innocentes beautés
  S'offre à mes yeux en foule et sort de tous côtés!
  Quelle aimable pudeur sur leur visage est peinte!
  Prospérez, cher espoir d'une nation sainte.                125
  Puissent jusques au ciel vos soupirs innocents
  Monter comme l'odeur d'un agréable encens!
  Que Dieu jette sur vous des regards pacifiques.


  ESTHER.

  Mes filles, chantez-nous quelqu'un de ces cantiques
  Où vos voix si souvent se mêlant à mes pleurs              130
  De la triste Sion célèbrent les malheurs.


  UNE ISRAÉLITE _seule chante_.

  Déplorable Sion, qu'as-tu fait de ta gloire?
      Tout l'univers admirait ta splendeur:
  Tu n'es plus que poussière; et de cette grandeur
  Il ne nous reste plus que la triste mémoire.               135
  Sion, jusques au ciel élévee autrefois,
      Jusqu'aux enfers maintenant abaissée,
        Puissé-je demeurer sans voix,
      Si dans mes chants ta douleur retracée
  Jusqu'au dernier soupir n'occupe ma pensée!                140



  TOUT LE CHOEUR.

  O rives du Jourdain! ô champs aimés des Cieux!
      Sacrés monts, fertiles vallées,
      Par cent miracles signalées!
      Du doux pays de nos aïeux
      Serons-nous toujours exilées?                          145


  UNE ISRAÉLITE seule.

  Quand verrai-je, ô Sion! relever tes remparts,
      Et de tes tours les magnifiques faîtes?
        Quand verrai-je de toutes parts
  Tes peuples en chantant accourir à tes fêtes?


  TOUT LE CHOEUR.

  O rives du Jourdain! ô champs aimés des Cieux!             145
      Sacrés monts, fertiles vallées,
      Par cent miracles signalees!
      Du doux pays de nos aïeux
      Serons-nous toujours exilées?




  SCÈNE III.


  ESTHER, MARDOCHÉE, ÉLISE, LE CHOEUR.


  ESTHER.

  Quel profane en ce lieu s'ose avancer vers nous?           155
  Que vois-je?  Mardochée?  O mon père, est-ce vous?
  Un ange du Seigneur, sous son aile sacrée,
  A donc conduit vos pas et caché votre entrée?
  Mais d'où vient cet air sombre, et ce cilice affreux,
  Et cette cendre enfin qui couvre vos cheveux?              160
  Que nous annoncez-vous?


  MARDOCHEE.

  O Reine infortunee!
  O d'un peuple innocent barbare destinee!
  Lisez, lisez l'arret detestable, cruel.
  Nous sommes tons perdus, et c'est fait d'Israel.


  ESTHER.

  Juste Ciel! tout mon sang dans mes veines se glace.        165


  MARDOCHEE.

  On doit de tous les Juifs exterminer la race.
  Au sanguinaire Aman nous sommes tous livres.
  Les glaives, les couteaux sont de'ja prepares.
  Toute la nation a la fois est proscrite.
  Aman, l'impie Aman, race d'Amalecite,                      170
  A pour ce coup funeste arme tout son credit;
  Et le Roi, trop cre'dule, a signe cet edit.
  Prevenu centre nous par cette bouche impure,
  Il nous croit en horreur a toute la nature.
  Ses ordres sont donnes; et dans tous ses Etats,            175
  Le jour fatal est pris pour tant d'assassinats.
  Cieux, eclairerez-vous cet horrible carnage?
  Le fer ne connaitra ni le sexe ni l'age;
  Tout doit servir de proie aux tigres, aux vautours;
  Et ce jour effroyable arrive dans dix jours.               180


  ESTHER.

  O Dieu, qui vois former des desseins si funestes,
  As-tu donc de Jacob abandonne les restes?


  UNE DES PLUS JEUNES ISRAELITES.

  Ciel, qui nous defendra, si tu ne nous defends?


  MARDOCHEE.

  Laissez les pleurs, Esther, a ces jeunes enfants.
  En vous est tout I'espoir de vos malheureux freres.        185
  II faut ies secourir.  Mais les heures sont cheres:
  Le temps vole, et bientot amenera le jour
  Ou le nom des Hebreux doit perir sans retour.
  Toute pleine du feu de tant de saints prophetes,
  Allez, osez au Roi declarer qui vous etes.                 190


  ESTHER.

  Helas! ignorez-vous quelles severes lois
  Aux timides mortels cachent ici les rois?
  Au fond de leur palais leur majeste terrible
  Affecte a leurs sujets de se rendre invisible;
  Et la mort est le prix de tout audacieux                   195
  Qui, sans etre appele, se presente a teurs yeux,
  Si le Roi dans l'instant, pour sauver le coupable,
  Ne lui donne a baiser son sceptre redoutable.
  Rien ne met a l'abri de cet ordre fatal,
  Ni le rang, ni le sexe, et le crime est e'gal.             200
  Moi-meme, sur son trone, a ses cotes assise,
  Je suis a cette loi comme une autre soumise;
  Et sans le prevenir, il faut, pour lui parler,
  Qu'il me cherche, ou du moins qu'il me fasse appeler.


  MARDOCHEE.

  Quoi? lorsque vous voyez perir votre patrie,               205
  Pour quelque chose, Esther, vous comptez votre vie!
  Dieu parle, et d'un mortel vous craignez le courroux!
  Que dis-je? votre vie, Esther, est-elle a vous?
  N'est-elle pas au sang dont vous etes issue?
  N'est-elle pas a Dieu dont vous l'avez recue?              210
  Et qui sait, lorsqu'au trône il conduisit vos pas,
  Si pour sauver son peuple il ne vous gardait pas?

  Songez-y bien: ce Dieu ne vous a pas choisie
  Pour être un vain spectacle aux peuples de l'Asie,
  Ni pour charmer les yeux des profanes humains.             215
  Pour un plus noble usage il réserve ses saints.
  S'immoler pour son nom et pour son héritage,
  D'un enfant d'Israël voilà le vrai partage:
  Trop heureuse pour lui de hasarder vos jours!
  Et quel besoin son bras a-t-il de nos secours?             220
  Que peuvent contre lui tous les rois de la terre?
  En vain ils s'uniraient pour lui faire la guerre:
  Pour dissiper leur ligue il n'a qu'à se montrer;
  Il parle, et dans la poudre il les fait tous rentrer.
  Au seul son de sa voix la mer fuit, le ciel tremble;       225
  Il voit comme un néant tout l'univers ensemble;
  Et les faibles mortels, vains jouets du trépas,
  Sont tous devant ses yeux comme s'ils n'étaient pas.

  S'il a permis d'Aman l'audace criminelle,
  Sans doute qu'il voulait éprouver votre zèle.              230
  C'est lui qui, m'excitant à vous oser chercher,
  Devant moi, chère Esther, a bien voulu marcher;
  Et s'il faut que sa voix frappe en vain vos oreilles,
  Nous n'en verrons pas moins éclater ses merveilles.
  Il peut confondre Aman, il peut briser nos fers            235
  Par la plus faible main qui soit dans l'univers.
  Et vous, qui n'aurez point accepté cette grâce,
  Vous périrez peut-être, et toute votre race.


  ESTHER.

  Allez.  Que tous les Juifs dans Suse répandus,
  A prier avec vous jour et nuit assidus,                    240
  Me prêtent de leurs voeux le secours salutaire,
  Et pendant ces trois jours gardent un jeûne austère.
  Déjà la sombre nuit a commencé son tour:
  Demain, quand le soleil rallumera le jour,
  Contente de périr, s'il faut que je périsse,               245
  J'irai pour mon pays m'offrir en sacrifice.
  Qu'on s'éloigne un moment.

  (_Le Choeur se retire vers le fond du théâtre_.)




  SCÈNE IV.


  ESTHER, ÉLISE, LE CHOEUR.

  ESTHER.

              O mon souverain Roi!
  Me voici donc tremblante et seule devant toi.
  Mon père mille fois m'a dit dans mon enfance
  Qu'avec nous tu juras une sainte alliance,                 250
  Quand, pour te faire un peuple agréable à tes yeux,
  Il plut à ton amour de choisir nos aïeux.
  Même tu leur promis de ta bouche sacrée
  Une postérité d'éternelle durée.
  Hélas!  ce peuple ingrat a méprisé ta loi;                 255
  La nation chérie a violé sa foi;
  Elle a répudiée son époux et son père,
  Pour rendre à d'autres dieux un honneur adultère.
  Maintenant elle sert sous un maître étranger.
  Mais c'est peu d'être esclave, on la veut égorger.         260
  Nos superbes vainqueurs, insultant à nos larmes,
  Imputent à leurs dieux le bonheur de leurs armes,
  Et veulent aujourd'hui qu'un même coup mortel
  Abolisse ton nom, ton peuple et ton autel.
  Ainsi donc un perfide, après tant de miracles,             265
  Pourrait anéantir la foi de tes oracles,
  Ravirait aux mortels le plus cher de tes dons,
  Le saint que tu promets et que nous attendons?
  Non, non, ne souffre pas que ces peuples farouches,
  Ivres de notre sang, ferment les seules bouches            270
  Qui dans tout l'univers célèbrent tes bienfaits;
  Et confonds tous ces dieux qui ne furent jamais.

  Pour moi, que tu retiens parmi ces infidèles,
  Tu sais combien je hais leurs fêtes criminelles,
  Et que je mets au rang des profanations                    275
  Leur table, leurs festins, et leurs libations;
  Que même cette pompe où je suis condamnée,
  Ce bandeau, dont il faut que je paraisse ornée
  Dans ces jours solennels à l'orgueil dédiés,
  Seule et dans le secret je le foule à mes pieds;           280
  Qu'à ces vains ornements je préfère la cendre,
  Et n'ai de goût qu'aux pleurs que tu me vois répandre,
  J'attendais le moment marqué dans ton arrêt,
  Pour oser de ton peuple embrasser l'intérêt.
  Ce moment est venu: ma prompte obéissance                  285
  Va d'un roi redoutable affronter la présence,
  C'est pour toi que je marche.  Accompagne mes pas
  Devant ce fier lion qui ne te connaît pas,
  Commande en me voyant que son courroux s'apaise,
  Et prête à mes discours un charme qui lui plaise.          290
  Les orages, les vents, les cieux te sont soumis:
  Tourne enfin sa fureur centre nos ennemis.




  SCÈNE V.

  (_Toute cette scène est chantée_.)

  LE CHOEUR.


  UNE ISRAÉLITE _seule_.

  Pleurons et gémissons, mes fidèles compagnes;
    A nos sanglots donnons un libre cours.
    Levons les yeux vers les saintes montagnes               295
    D'où l'innocence attend tout son secours.
      O mortelles alarmes!
  Tout Israël périt.  Pleurez, mes tristes yeux:
    Il ne fut jamais sous les cieux
    Un si juste sujet de larmes.                             300


  TOUT LE CHOEUR.

      O mortelles alarmes!


  UNE AUTRE ISRAÉLITE.

  N'était-ce pas assez qu'un vainqueur odieux
  De l'auguste Sion eût détruit tous les charmes,
  Et traîné ses enfants captifs en mille lieux?


  TOUT LE CHOEUR.

      O mortelles alarmes!                                   305


  LA MÊME ISRAÉLITE.

  Faibles agneaux livrés à des loups furieux,
      Nos soupirs sont nos seules armes.
  TOUT LE CHOEUR.

      O mortelles alarmes!


  UNE DES ISRAÉLITES.

  Arrachons, déchirons tous ces vains ornements
      Qui parent notre tête.                                 310


  UNE AUTRE.

      Revêtons-nous d'habillements
      Conformes à l'horrible fête
      Que l'impie Aman nous apprête.


  TOUT LE CHOEUR.

  Arrachons, déchirons tous ces vains ornements
      Qui parent notre tête.                                 315


  UNE ISRAÉLITE _seule_.

    Quel carnage de toutes parts!
  On égorge à la fois les enfants, les vieillards,
      Et la soeur et le frère,
      Et la fille et la mère,
      Le fils dans les bras de son père.                     320
  Que de corps entassés! que de membres épars
      Privés de sépulture!
    Grand Dieu! tes saints sont la pâture
    Des tigres et des léopards.


  UNE DES PLUS JEUNES ISRAÉLITES.

      Hélas! si jeune encore,                                325
  Par quel crime ai-je pu mériter mon malheur?
    Ma vie à peine a commencé d'éclore.
      Je tomberai comme une fleur
      Qui n'a vu qu'une aurore.
      Hélas! si jeune encore,                                330
  Par quel crime ai-je pu mériter mon malheur?


  UNE AUTRE.

  Des offenses d'autrui malheureuses victimes,
  Que nous servent, hélas! ces regrets superflus?
  Nos pères ont péché, nos pères ne sont plus,
    Et nous portons la peine de leurs crimes.                335


  TOUT LE CHOEUR.

  Le Dieu que nous servons est le Dieu des combats.
      Non, non, il ne souffrira pas
      Qu'on égorge ainsi l'innocence.


  UNE ISRAÉLITE _seule_.

    Hé quoi? dirait l'impiété,
  Où donc est-il ce Dieu si redouté                          340
  Dont Israël nous vantait la puissance?


  UNE AUTRE.

  Ce Dieu jaloux, ce Dieu victorieux,
    Frémissez, peuples de la terre,
  Ce Dieu jaloux, ce Dieu victorieux
    Est le seui qui commande aux cieux.                      345
    Ni les éclairs ni le tonnerre
    N'obéissent point à vos dieux.


  UNE AUTRE.

    Il renverse l'audacieux.


  UNE AUTRE.

      Il prend l'humble sous sa défense.


  TOUT LE CHOEUR.

  Le Dieu que nous servons est le Dieu des combats.          350
      Non, non, il ne souffrira pas
      Qu'on égorge ainsi l'innocence.


  DEUX ISRAÉLITES.

      O Dieu, que la gloire couronne,
      Dieu, que la lumière environne,
      Qui voles sur l'aile des vents,                        355
    Et dont le trône est porté par les anges!


  DEUX AUTRES DES PLUS JEUNES.

    Dieu, qui veux bien que de simples enfants
      Avec eux chantent tes louanges!


  TOUT LE CHOEUR.

      Tu vois nos pressants dangers:
      Donne à ton nom la victoire:                           360
      Ne souffre point que ta gloire
      Passe à des dieux étrangers.


  UNE ISRAÉLITE _seule_.

      Arme-toi, viens nous défendre.
  Descends tel qu'autrefois la mer te vit descendre.
    Que les méchants apprennent aujourd'hui                  365
      A craindre ta colère.
  Qu'ils soient comme la poudre et la paille legere
    Que le vent chasse devant lui.


  TOUT LE CHOEUR.

      Tu vois nos pressants dangers:
      Donne à ton nom la victoire;                           370
      Ne souffre point que ta gloire
      Passe à des dieux étrangers.




  ACTE SECOND.

  (_Le théàtre représente la chambre où
  est le trône Assuérus_.)


  SCÈNE I.

  AMAN, HYDASPE.


  AMAN.

  Hé quoi? lorsque le jour ne commence qu'à luire,
  Dans ce lieu redoutable oses-tu m'introduire?


  HYDASPE.

  Vous savez qu'on s'en peut reposer sur ma foi,             375
  Que ces portes, Seigneur, n'obéissent qu'à moi.
  Venez.  Partout ailleurs on pourrait nous entendre.


  AMAN.

  Quel est donc le secret que tu me veux apprendre?


  HYDASPE.

  Seigneur, de vos bienfaits mille fois honoré,
  Je me souviens toujours que je vous ai juré                380
  D'exposer à vos yeux par des avis sincères
  Tout ce que ce palais renferme de mystères.
  Le Roi d'un noir chagrin paraît enveloppé.
  Quelque songe effrayant cette nuit l'a frappé.
  Pendant que tout gardait un silence paisible,              385
  Sa voix s'est fait entendre avec un cri terrible.
  J'ai couru.  Le désordre était dans ses discours.
  Il s'est plaint d'un péril qui menaçait ses jours:
  Il parlait d'ennemi, de ravisseur farouche;
  Même le nom d'Esther est sorti de sa bouche.               390
  Il a dans ces horreurs passé toute la nuit.
  Enfin, las d'appeler un sommeil qui le fuit,
  Pour écarter de lui ces images funèbres,
  Il s'est fait apporter ces annales célèbres
  Où les faits de son règne, avec soin amassés,              395
  Par de fideles mains chaque jour sont tracés.
  On y conserve écrits le service et l'offense,
  Monuments éternels d'amour et de vengeance.
  Le Roi, que j'ai laissé plus caime dans son lit,
  D'une oreille attentive ecouté ce récit.                   400


  AMAN.

  De quel temps de sa vie a-t-il choisi l'histoire?


  HYDASPE.

  Il revoit tous ces temps si remplis de sa gloire,
  Depuis le fameux jour qu'au trône de Cyrus
  Le choix du sort plaça l'heureux Assuérus.


  AMAN.

  Ce songe, Hydaspe, est donc sorti de son idée?             405


  HYDASPE.

  Entre tous les devins fameux dans la Chaldée,
  Il a fait assembler ceux qui savent le mieux
  Lire en un songe obscur les volontés des cieux.
  Mais quel trouble vous-même aujourd'hui vous agite?
  Votre âme, en m'écoutant, paraît toute interdite.          410
  L'heureux Aman a-t-il quelques secrets ennuis?


  AMAN.

  Peux-tu le demander dans la place où je suis,
  Haï, craint, envié, souvent plus misérable
  Que tous les malheureux que mon pouvoir accable?


  HYDASPE.

  Hé! qui jamais du Ciel eut des regards plus doux?          415
  Vous voyez l'univers prosterné devant vous.


  AMAN.

  L'univers?  Tous les jours un homme. . . un vil esclave,
  D'un front audacieux me dédaigne et me brave.


  HYDASPE.

  Quel est cet ennemi de l'État et du Roi?


  AMAN.

  Le nom de Mardochée est-il connu de toi?                   420


  HYDASPE.

  Qui? ce chef d'une race abominable, impie?


  AMAN.

  Oui, lui-même.


  HYDASPE.

          Hé, Seigneur! d'une si belle vie
  Un si faible ennemi peut-il troubler la paix?


  AMAN.

  L'insolent devant moi ne se courba jamais.
  En vain de la faveur du plus grand des monarques           425
  Tout révère à genoux les glorieuses marques;
  Lorsque d'un saint respect tous les Persans touchés
  N'osent lever leurs fronts à la terre attachés,
  Lui, fierement assis, et la tête immobile,
  Traite tous ces honneurs d'impiété servile,                430
  Présente à mes regards un front séditieux,
  Et ne daignerait pas au moins baisser les yeux.
  Du palais cepeudant il assiège la porte:
  A quelque heure que j'entre, Hydaspe, ou que je sorte,
  Son visage odieux m'afflige et me poursuit;                435
  Et mon esprit troublé le voit encor la nuit.
  Ce matin j'ai voulu devancer la lumière:
  Je l'ai trouvé couvert d'une affreuse poussière,
  Revêtu de lambeaux, tout pâle; mais son oeil
  Conservait sous la cendre encor le même orgueil.           440
  D'où lui vient, cher ami, cette impudente audace?
  Toi, qui dans ce palais vois tout ce qui se passe,
  Crois-tu que quelque voix ose parler pour lui?
  Sur quel roseau fragile a-t-il mis son appui?


  HYDASPE.

  Seigneur, vous le savez, son avis salutaire                445
  Découvrit de Tharès le complot sanguinaire.
  Le Roi promit alors de le récompenser.
  Le Roi, depuis ce temps, paraît n'y plus penser.


  AMAN.

  Non, il faut à tes yeux dépouiller l'artifice.
  J'ai su de mon destin corriger l'injustice,                450

  Dans les mains des Persans jeune enfant apporté,
  Je gouverne l'empire où je fus acheté.
  Mes richesses des rois égalent l'opulence.
  Environné d'enfants, soutiens de ma puissance,
  Il ne manque à mon front que le bandeau royal.             455
  Cependant (des mortels aveuglement fatal!)
  De cet amas d'honneurs la douceur passagère
  Fait sur mon coeur à peine une atteinte légère;
  Mais Mardochée, assis aux portes du palais,
  Dans ce coeur malheureux enfonce mille traits;             460
  Et toute ma grandeur me devient insipide,
  Tandis que le soleil éclaire ce perfide.


  HYDASPE.

  Vous serez de sa vue affranchi dans dix jours:
  La nation entière est promise aux vautours.


  AMAN.

  Ah! que ce temps est long à mon impatience!                465
  C'est lui, je te veux bien cofier ma vengeance,
  C'est lui qui, devant moi refusant de ployer,
  Les a livrés au bras qui les va foudroyer.
  C'était trop peu pour moi d'une telle victime:
  La vengeance trop faible attire un second crime.           470
  Un homme tel qu'Aman, lorsqu'on l'ose irriter,
  Dans sa juste fureur ne peut trop éclater.
  Il faut des châtiments dont l'univers frémisse;
  Qu'on tremble en comparant l'offense et le supplice;
  Que les peuples entiers dans le sang soient noyés.         475
  Je veux qu'on dise un jour aux siècles effrayés:
  «Il fut des Juifs, il fut une insolente race;
  Répandus sur la terre, ils en couvraient la face,
  Un seul osa d'Aman attirer le courroux,
  Aussitôt de la terre ils disparurent tous.»                480


  HYDASPE.

  Ce n'est donc pas, Seigneur, le sang amalécite
  Dont la voix à les perdre en secret vous excite?


  AMAN.

  Je sais que, descendu de ce sang malheureux,
  Une éternelle haine a dû m'armer centre eux;
  Qu'ils firent d'Amalec un indigne carnage;                 485
  Que jusqu'aux vils troupeaux tout éprouva leur rage,
  Qu'un déplorable reste à peine fut sauvé.
  Mais, crois-moi, dans le rang où je suis éléve,
  Mon âme, à ma grandeur tout entière attachée,
  Des intérêts du sang est faiblement touchée.               490
  Mardochee est coupable; et que faut-il de plus?
  Je prévins donc contre eux l'esprit d'Assuérus:
  J'inventai des couleurs; j'armai la calomnie;
  J'intéressai sa gloire; il trembla pour sa vie.
  Je les peignis puissants, riches, séditieux,               495
  Leur dieu même ennemi de tous les autres dieux.
  «Jusqu'à quand souffre-t-on que ce peuple respire,
  Et d'un culte profane infecte votre empire?
  Étrangers dans la Perse, à nos lois opposés,
  Du reste des humains ils semblent divisés,                 500
  N'aspirent qu'à troubler le repos où nous sommes,
  Et détestés partout, détestent tous les hommes,
  Prevenez, punissez leurs insolents efforts;
  De leur depouille enfin grossissez vos trésors.»
  Je dis, et l'on me crut.  Le Roi, dèes l'heure même,       505
  Mit dans ma main le sceau de son pouvoir suprême;
  «Assure, me dit-il, le repos de ton roi;
  Va, perds ces malheureux: leur dépouille est à toi.»
  Toute la nation fut ainsi condamnée.
  Du carnage avec lui je réglai la journée.                  510
  Mais de ce traître enfin le trépas differé
  Fait trop souffrir mon coeur de son sang altéré.
  Un je ne sais quel trouble empoisonne ma joie.
  Pourquoi dix jours encor faut-il que je le voie?


  HYDASPE.

  Et ne pouvez-vous pas d'un mot l'exterminer?               515
  Dites au Roi, Seigneur, de vous l'abandonner.


  AMAN.

  Je viens pour epier le moment favorable.
  Tu connais comme moi ce prince inexorable.
  Tu sais combien terrible en ses soudains transports,
  De nos desseins souvent il rompt tous les ressorts.        520
  Mais à me tourmenter ma crainte est trop subtile:
  Mardochée à ses yeux est une âme trop vile.


  HYDASPE.

  Que tardez-vous?  Allez, et faites promptement
  Élever de sa mort le honteux instrument.


  AMAN.

  J'entends du bruit; je sors.
                      Toi, si le Roi m'appelle. . . .        525


  HYDASPE.

  Il suffit.



  SCÈNE II.

  ASSUÉRUS, HYDASPE, ASAPH, SUITE D'ASSUÉRUS.

  ASSUÉRUS.

  Ainsi donc, sans cet avis fidèle,
  Deux traîtres dans son lit assassinaient leur roi?
  Qu'on me laisse, et qu'Asaph seui demeure avec moi.



  SCÈNE III.

  ASSUÉRUS, ASAPH.


  ASSUÉRUS, _assis sur son trône_.

  Je veux bien l'avouer: de ce couple perfide
  J'avais presque oublié l'attentat parricide;               530
  Et j'ai pâli deux fois au terrible récit
  Qui vient d'en retracer l'image à mon esprit.
  Je vois de quel succès leur fureur fut suivie,
  Et que dans les tourments ils laissèrent la vie.
  Mais ce sujet zélé qui, d'un oeil si subtil,               535
  Sut de leur noir complot développer le fil,
  Qui me montra sur moi leur main déjà levée,
  Enfin par qui la Perse avec moi fut sauvée,
  Quel honneur pour sa foi, quel prix a-t-il reçu?


  ASAPH.

  On lui promit beaucoup: c'est tout ce que j'ai su.         540
  ASSUÉRUS.

  O d'un si grand service oubli trop condamnable!
  Des embarras du trône effet inévitable!
  De soins tumultueux un prince environné
  Vers de nouveaux objets est sans cesse entraîné;
  L'avenir l'inquiète, et le présent le frappe,              545
  Mais plus prompt que l'éclair, le passe nous échappe;
  Et de tant de mortels, à toute heure empressés
  A nous faire valoir leurs soins intéressés,
  Il ne s'en trouve point qui, touchés d'un vrai zèle,
  Prennent à notre gloire un intérêt fidèle,                 550
  Du mérite oublié nous fassent souvenir;
  Trop prompts à nous parler de ce qu'il faut punir.
  Ah! que plutôt l'injure échappe à ma vengeance,
  Qu'un si rare bienfait à ma reconnaissance!
  Et qui voudrait jamais s'exposer pour son roi?             555
  Ce mortel qui montra tant de zèle pour moi,
  Vit-il encore?


  ASAPH.

          Il voit l'astre qui vous éclaire.


  ASSUÉRUS.

  Et que n'a-t-il plus tôt demandé son salaire?
  Quel pays reculé le cachè a mes bienfaits?


  ASAPH.

  Assis le plus souvent aux portes du palais,                560
  Sans se plaindre de vous, ni de sa destinée,
  Il y traïne, Seigneur, sa vie infortunée.


  ASSUÉRUS.

  Et je dois d'autant moins oublier la vertu,
  Qu'elle-même s'oublie.  Il se nomme, dis-tu?


  ASAPH.

  Mardochée est le nom que je viens de vous lire.            565


  ASSUÉRUS.

  Et son pays?


  ASAPH.

            Seigneur, puisqu'il faut vous le dire,
  C'est un de ces captifs à périr destinés,
  Des rives du Jourdain sur l'Euphrate amenés.


  ASSUÉRUS.

  Il est donc Juif?  O ciel!  Sur le point que la vie
  Par mes propres sujets m'allait être ravie,                570
  Un Juif rend par ses soins leurs efforts impuissants?
  Un Juif m'a préservé du glaive des Persans?
  Mais puisqu'il m'a sauvé, quel qu'il soil, il n'importe.
  Holà! quelqu'un.



  SCÈNE IV.

  ASSUÉRUS, HYDASPE, ASAPH.


  HYDASPE.

            Seigneur.


  ASSUÉRUS.

              Regarde à cette porte.
  Vois s'il s'offre à tes yeux quelque grand de ma cour.     575


  HYDASPE.

  Aman à votre porte a devancé le jour.


  ASSUÉRUS.

  Qu'il entre.  Ses avis m'éclaireront peut-être.



  SCÈNE V.

  ASSUÉRUS, AMAN, HYDASPE, ASAPH.


  ASSUÉRUS.

  Approche, heureux appui du trône de ton maître,
  Âme de mes conseils, et qui seul tant de fois              580
  Du sceptre dans ma main as soulagé le poids.
  Un reproche secret embarrasse mon âme.
  Je sais combien est pur le zeèe qui t'enflamme:
  Le mensonge jamais n'entra dans tes discours,
  Et mon intérêt seul est le but où tu cours.
  Dis-moi donc: que doit faire un prince magnanime           585
  Qui veut combler d'honneurs un sujet qu'il estime?
  Par quel gage éclatant et digne d'un grand roi
  Puis-je récompenser le mérite et la foi?
  Ne donne point de borne à ma reconnaissance.
  Mesure tes conseils sur ma vaste puissance.                590


  AMAN, _tout bas_.

  C'est pour toi-même, Aman, que tu vas prononcer;
  Et quel autre que toi peut-on récompenser?


  ASSUÉRUS.

  Que penses-tu?


  AMAN.

              Seigneur, je cherche, j'envisage,
  Des monarques persans la conduite et l'usage.
  Mais à mes yeux en vain je les rappelle tous:              595
  Pour vous régler sur eux que sont-ils près de vous?
  Votre règne aux neveux doit servir de modèle.
  Vous voulez d'un sujet reconnaître le zèle.
  L'honneur seul peut flatter un esprit généreux;
  Je voudrais donc, Seigneur, que ce mortel heureux,         600
  De la pourpre aujourd'hui paré comme vous-même,
  Et portant sur le front le sacré diadème,
  Sur un de vos coursiers pompeusement orné,
  Aux yeux de vos sujets dans Suse fût mené;
  Que, pour comble de gloire et de magnificence,             605
  Un seigneur éminent en richesse, en puissance,
  Enfin de votre empire après vous le premier,
  Par la bride guidât son superbe coursier;
  Et lui-même, marchant en habits magnifiques,
  Criât à haute voix dans les places publiques:              610
  «Mortels, prosternez-vous: c'est ainsi que le Roi
  Honore le mérite et couronne la foi.»


  ASSUÉRUS.

  Je vois que la sagesse elle-même t'inspire.
  Avec mes volontés ton sentiment conspire.
  Va, ne perds point de temps.  Ce que tu m'as dicté,        615
  Je veux de point en point qu'il soit exécuté.
  La vertu dans l'oubli ne sera plus cachée.
  Aux portes du palais prends le Juif Mardochee:
  C'est lui que je prétends honorer aujourd'hui.
  Ordonne son triomphe, et marche devant lui.                620
  Que Suse par ta voix de son nom retentisse,
  Et fais à son aspect que tout genou flechisse.
  Sortez tous.


  AMAN.

            Dieux!



  SCÈNE VI.

  ASSUÉRUS, _seul_.

              Le prix est sans doute inouï:
  Jamais d'un tel honneur un sujet n'a joui.
  Mais plus la récompense est grande et glorieuse,           625
  Plus même de ce Juif la race est odieuse,
  Plus j'assure ma vie, et montre avec éclat
  Combien Assuérus redoute d'être ingrat.
  On verra l'innocent discerné du coupable.
  Je n'en perdrai pas moins ce peuple abominable.            630
  Leurs crimes. . . .



  SCÈNE VII.

  ASSUÉRUS, ESTHER, ELISE, THAMAR, PARTIE DU CHOEUR.

  (_Esther entre, s'appuyant sur Élise; quatre Israélites
  soutiennent sa robe_?)


  ASSUÉRUS.

              Sans mon ordre on porte ici ses pas?
  Quel mortel insolent vient chercher le trépas?
  Gardes. . . . C'est vous, Esther?  Quoi? sans être attendue?


  ESTHER.

  Mes filles, soutenez votre reine éperdue.
  Je me meurs.
              (_Elle tombe évanouie_.)


  ASSUÉRUS.

              Dieux puissants! quelle étrange pâleur         635
  De son teint tout à coup efface la couleur?
  Esther, que craignez-vous?  Suis-je pas votre frère?
  Est-ce pour vous qu'est fait un ordre si sévère?
  Vivez, le sceptre d'or, que vous tend cette main,
  Pour vous de ma clémence est un gage certain.              640


  ESTHER.

  Quelle voix salutaire ordonne que je vive,
  Et rappelle en mon sein mon âme fugitive?


  ASSUÉRUS.

  Ne connaissez-vous pas la voix de votre époux?
  Encore un coup, vivez, et revenez à vous.


  ESTHER.

  Seigneur, je n'ai jamais contemplé qu'avec crainte         645
  L'auguste majesté sur votre front empreinte:
  Jugez combien ce front irrité contre moi
  Dans mon âme troublée a dû jeter d'effroi.
  Sur ce trône sacré, qu'environne la foudre,
  J'ai cru vous voir tout prêt à me reduire en poudre.       650
  Hélas! sans frissonner, quel coeur audacieux
  Soutiendrait les éclairs qui partaient de vos yeux?
  Ainsi du Dieu vivant la colère étincelle. . . .

  ASSUÉRUS.

  O soleil! ô flambeaux de lumière immortelle!
  Je me trouble moi-même, et sans fremissement               655
  Je ne puis voir sa peine et son saisissement.
  Calmez, Reine, calmez la frayeur qui vous presse
  Du coeur d'Assuérus souveraine maîtresse,
  Éprouvez seulement son ardente amitié:
  Faut-il de mes États vous donner la moitié?                660


  ESTHER.

  Hé! se peut-il qu'un roi craint de la terre entière;
  Devant qui tout fléchit et baise la poussière,
  Jette sur son esclave un regard si serein,
  Et m'offre sur son coeur un pouvoir souverain?


  ASSUÉRUS.

  Croyez-moi, chère Esther, ce sceptre, cet empire,          665
  Et ces profonds respects que la terreur inspire,
  A leur pompeux éclat mêlent peu de douceur,
  Et fatiguent souvent leur triste possesseur.
  Je ne trouve qu'en vous je ne sais quelle grâce
  Qui me charme toujours et jamais ne me lasse.              670
  De l'aimable vertu doux et puissants attraits!
  Tout respire en Esther l'innocence et la paix.
  Du chagrin le plus noir elle écarte les ombres,
  Et fait des jours sereins de mes jours les plus sombres
  Que dis-je? sur ce trône assis auprès de vous,             675
  Des astres ennemis j'en crains moins le courroux,
  Et crois que votre front prête à mon diadème
  Un éclat qui le rend respectable aux dieux même.
  Osez donc me répondre, et ne me cachez pas
  Quel sujet important conduit ici vos pas.                  680
  Quel intérêt, quels soins vous agitent, vous pressent?
  Je vois qu'en m'écoutant vos yeux au Ciel s'adressent.
  Parlez: de vos désirs le succès est certain,
  Si ce succès dépend d'une mortelle main.


  ESTHER.

  O bonté qui m'assure autant qu'elle m'honore!
  Un intérêt pressant veut que je vous implore.
  J'attends ou mon malheur ou ma félicité;
  Et tout dépend, Seigneur, de votre volonté.
  Un mot de votre bouche, en terminant mes peines,
  Peut rendre Esther heureuse entre toutes les reines.       690


  ASSUÉRUS.

  Ah! que vous enflammez mon désir curieux!


  ESTHER.

  Seigneur, si j'ai trouvé grâce devant vos yeux,
  Si jamais à mes voeux vous fûtes favorable,
  Permettez, avant tout, qu'Esther puisse à sa table
  Recevoir aujourd'hui son souverain Seigneur,               695
  Et qu'Aman soit admis à cet excès d'honneur.
  J'oserai devant lui rompre ce grand silence,
  Et j'ai, pour m'expliquer, besoin de sa présence.


  ASSUÉRUS.

  Dans quelle inquiétude, Esther, vous me jetez!
  Toutefois, qu'il soit fait comme vous souhaitez.           700
                (_A ceux de sa suite._)
  Vous, que l'on cherche Aman; et qu'on lui fasse entendre
  Qu'invité chez la Reine, il ait soin de s'y rendre.


  HYDASPE.

  Les savants Chaldéens, par votre ordre appelés,
  Dans cet appartement, Seigneur, sont assemblés.


  ASSUÉRUS.

  Princesse, un songe étrange occupe ma pensée.              705
  Vous-même en leur réponse etes intéressée.
  Venez, derrière un voile écoutant leurs discours,
  De vos propres clartés me prêter le secours.
  Je crains pour vous, pour moi, quelque ennemi perfide.


  ESTHER.

  Suis-moi, Thamar.  Et vous, troupe jeune et timide,        710
  Sans craindre ici les yeux d'une profane cour,
  A l'abri de ce trône attendez mon retour.



  SCÈNE VIII.

  (_Cette scène est partie déclamée sans chant,
  et partie chantée.)

  ÉLISE, PARTIE DU CHOEUR.


  ÉLISE.

  Que vous semble, mes soeurs, de l'état oû nous sommes?
    D'Esther, d'Aman, qui le doit emporter?
        Est-ce Dieu, sont-ce les hommes                      715
      Dont les oeuvres vont éclater?
    Vous avez vu quelle ardente colère,
  Allumait de ce roi le visage sévère.


  UNE DES ISRAÉLITES.

  Des éclairs de ses yeux l'oeil était ébloui.


  UNE AUTRE.

  Et sa voix m'a paru comme un tonnerre horrible.            720


  ÉLISE.

      Comment ce courroux si terrible
    En un moment s'est-il évanoui?


  UNE DES ISRAÉLITES _chante_.

  Un moment a changé ce courage inflexible.
  Le lion rugissant est un agneau paisible.
  Dieu, notre Dieu sans doute a versé dans son coeur         725
        Cet esprit de douceur.


  LE CHOEUR _chante_.

  Dieu, notre Dieu sans doute a versé dans son coeur
        Cet esprit de douceur.


  LA MEME ISRAÉLITE _chante_.

        Tel qu'un ruisseau docile
  Obéit à la main qui détourne son cours,                    730
  Et, laissant de ses eaux partager le secours,
      Va rendre tout un champ fertile,
  Dieu, de nos volontés arbitre souverain,
    Le coeur des rois est ainsi dans ta main.


  ÉLISE.

  Ah! que je crains, mes soeurs, les funestes nuages         735
    Qui de ce prince obscurcissent les yeux!
  Comme il est aveuglé du culte de ses dieux!


  UNE DES ISRAÉLITES.

  Il n'atteste jamais que leurs noms odieux.


  UNE AUTRE.

  Aux feux inanimés dont se parent les cieux
      Il rend de profanes hommages.                          740


  UNE AUTRE.

  Tout son palais est plein de leurs images.


  LE CHOEUR _chante_.

  Malheureux! vous quittez le maître des humains
    Pour adorer l'ouvrage de vos mains.


  UNE ISRAÉLITE _chante_.

    Dieu d'Israël, dissipe enfin cette ombre:
  Des larmes de tes saints quand seras-tu touché?            745
      Quand sera le voile arraché
  Qui sur tout l'univers jette une nuit si sombre?
    Dieu d'Israël, dissipe enfin cette ombre:
      Jusqu'a quand seras-tu caché?


  UNE DES PLUS JEUNES ISRAÉLITES.

  Parlons plus bas, mes soeurs.  Ciel! si quelque infidèle,  750
  Écoutant nos discours, nous allait déceler!


  ÉLISE.

  Quoi? fille d'Abraham, une crainte mortelle
    Semble déjà vous faire chanceler?
  Hé! si l'impie Aman, dans sa main homicide
  Faisant luire à vos yeux un glaive menaçant,               755
    A blasphémer le nom du Tout-Puissant
    Voulait forcer votre bouche timide?


  UNE AUTRE ISRAÉLITE.

  Peut-être Assuérus, frémissant de courroux,
      Si nous ne courbons les genoux
      Devant une muette idole,                               760
      Commandera qu'on nous immole.
      Chère soeur, que choisirez-vous?


  LA JEUNE ISRAÉLITE.

  Moi! je pourrais trahir le Dieu que j'aime?
  J'adorerais un dieu sans force et sans vertu,
  Reste d'un tronc par les vents abattu,                     765
  Qui ne peut se sauver lui-même?


  LE CHOEUR _chante_.

  Dieux impuissants, dieux sourds, tous ceux qui vous implorent
       Ne seront jamais entendus.
    Que les démons, et ceux qui les adorent,
    Soient à jamais détruits et confondus.                   770


  UNE ISRAÉLITE _chante_.

  Que ma bouche et mon coeur, et tout ce que je suis,
  Rendent honneur au Dieu qui m'a donné la vie!
    Dans les craintes, dans les ennuis,
    En ses bontés mon âme se confie.
  Veut-il par mon trépas que je le glorifie?                 775
  Que ma bouche et mon coeur, et tout ce que je'suis,
  Rendent honneur au Dieu qui m'a donné la vie.


  ÉLISE.

  Je n'admirai jamais la gloire de l'impie.


  UNE AUTRE ISRAÉLITE.

  Au bonheur du méchant qu'une autre porte envie.


  ÉLISE.

      Tous ses jours paraissent charmants;                   780
      L'or éclate en ses vêtements;
  Son orgueil est sans borne ainsi que sa richesse;
  Jamais l'air n'est troublé de ses gémissements;
  Il s'endort, il s'éveille au son des instruments;
      Son coeur nage dans la mollesse.                       785


  UNE AUTRE ISRAÉLITE.

      Pour comble de prospérité,
  Il espère revivre en sa postérité;
  Et d'enfants à sa table une riante troupe
  Semble boire avec lui la joie à pleine coupe.
                           (_Tout le reste est chanté_.)


  LE CHOEUR.

    Heureux, dit-on, le peuple florissant                    790
    Sur qui ces biens coulent en abondance!
      Plus heureux le peuple innocent
  Qui dans le Dieu du Ciel a mis sa confiance!


  UNE ISRAÉLITE _seule_.

  Pour contenter ses frivoles désirs,
  L'homme insensé vainement se consume;                      795
      Il trouve l'amertume
      Au milieu des plaisirs.


  UNE AUTRE, _seule_.

  Le bonheur de l'impie est toujours agité;
  Il erre à la merci de sa propre inconstance.
      Ne cherchons la félicité                               800
      Que dans la paix de l'innocence.


  LA MÊME _avec une autre_.

        O douce paix!
      O lumière éternelle!
      Beauté toujours nouvelle!
  Heureux le coeur épris de tes attraits!                    805
        O douce paix!
      O lumière éternelle!
  Heureux le coeur qui ne te perd jamais!


  LE CHOEUR.

        O douce paix!
      O lumière éternelle!
      Beauté toujours nouvelle!                              810
        O douce paix!
  Heureux le coeur qui ne te perd jamais!


  LA MÊME _seule_.

  Nulle paix pour l'impie.  Il la cherche, elle fuit,
  Et le calme en son coeur ne trouve point de place.         815
  Le glaive au dehors le poursuit;
  Le remords au dedans le glace.


  UNE AUTRE.

  La gloire des méchants en un moment s'éteint.
    L'affreux tombeau pour jamais les dévore.
  Il n'en est pas ainsi de celui qui te craint:              820
  Il renaîtra, mon Dieu, plus brillant que l'aurore.


  LE CHOEUR.

          O douce paix!
    Heureux le coeur qui ne te perd jamais!


  ÉLISE, _sans chanter_.

  Mes soeurs, j'entends du bruit dans la chambre prochaine.
  On nous appelle: allons rejoindre notre reine.             825




  ACTE TROISIEME.

  Le théâtre représente les jardins d'Esther,
  et un des côtés du salon où se fait le festin.


  SCÈNE I.

  AMAN, ZARÈS.


  ZARÈS.

  C'est donc ici d'Esther le superbe jardin;
  Et ce salon pompeux est le lieu du festin.
  Mais tandis que la porte en est encor fermée,
  Écoutez les conseils d'une épouse alarmée.
  Au nom du sacré noeud qui me lie avec vous,                830
  Dissimulez, Seigneur, cet aveugle courroux;
  Éclaircissez ce front où la tristesse est peinte;
  Les rois craignent surtout le reproche et la plainte.
  Seul entre tous les grands par la Reine invité,
  Ressentez donc aussi cette félicité.                       835
  Si le mal vous aigrit, que le bienfait vous touche.
  Je l'ai cent fois appris de votre propre bouche:
  Quiconque ne sait pas dévorer un affront,
  Ni de fausses couleurs se déguiser le front,
  Loin de l'aspect des rois qu'il s'écarte, qu'il fuie.      840
  Il est des contre-temps qu'il faut qu'un sage essuie.
  Souvent avec prudence un outrage enduré
  Aux honneurs les plus hauts a servi de dégre.


  AMAN.

  O douleur! ô supplice affreux à la pensée!
  O honte, qui jamais ne peut être effacée!                  845
  Un exécrable Juif, l'opprobre des humains,
  S'est donc vu de la pourpre habillé par mes mains!
  C'est peu qu'il ait sur moi remporté la victoire;
  Malheureux, j'ai servi de héraut à sa gloire.
  Le traître!  Il insultait à ma confusion;                  850
  Et tout le peuple même avec dérision,
  Observant la rougeur qui couvrait mon visage,
  De ma chute certaine en tirait le présage.
  Roi cruel! ce sont là les jeux où tu te plais.
  Tu ne m'as prodigué tes perfides bienfaits                 855
  Que pour me faire mieux sentir ta tyrannie,
  Et m'accabler enfin de plus d'ignominie.


  ZARÈS.

  Pourquoi juger si mal de son intention?
  Il croit récompenser une bonne action.
  Ne faut-il pas, Seigneur, s'étonner au contraire           860
  Qu'il en ait si longtemps différé le salaire?
  Du reste, il n'a rien fait que par votre conseil.
  Vous-même avez dicté tout ce triste appareil.
  Vous êtes après lui le premier de l'Empire.
  Sait-il toute l'horreur que ce Juif vous inspire?          865


  AMAN.

  Il sait qu'il me doit tout, et que pour sa grandeur
  J'ai foulé sous les pieds remords, crainte, pudeur;
  Qu'avec un coeur d'airain exerçant sa puissance,
  J'ai fait taire les lois et gémir l'innocence,
  Que pour lui, des Persans bravant l'aversion,              870
  J'ai chéri, j'ai cherché la malédiction;
  Et pour prix de ma vie à leur haine exposée,
  Le barbare aujourd'hui m'expose à leur risée!


  ZARÈS.

  Seigneur, nous sommes seuls.  Que sert de se flatter?
  Ce zèle que pour lui vous fïtes éclater,                   875
  Ce soin d'immoler tout à son pouvoir suprême,
  Entre nous, avaient-ils d'autre objet que vous-même?
  Et sans chercher plus loin, tous ces Juifs désolés,
  N'est-ce pas à vous seul que vous les immolez?
  Et ne craignez-vous point que quelque avis funeste. . . .  880
  Enfin la cour nous hait, le peuple nous déteste.
  Ce Juif même, il le faut confesser malgré moi,
  Ce Juif, comblé d'honneurs, me cause quelque effroi.
  Les malheurs sont souvent enchaînés l'un à l'autre,
  Et sa race toujours fut fatale à la vôtre,                 885
  De ce léger affront songez à profiter.
  Peut-être la fortune est prête à vous quitter;
  Aux plus affreux excès son inconstance passe.
  Prevénez son caprice avant qu'elle se lasse.
  Où tendez-vous plus haut?  Je frémis quand je voi          890
  Les abîmes profonds qui s'offrent devant moi:
  La chute désormais ne peut être qu'horrible.
  Osez chercher ailleurs un destin plus paisible.
  Regagnez l'Hellespont, et ces bords écartés
  Où vos aïeux errants jadis furent jetés,                   895
  Lorsque des Juifs contre eux la vengeance allumée
  Chassa tout Amalec de la triste Idumée.
  Aux malices du sort enfin dérobez-vous.
  Nos plus riches trésors marcheront devant nous.
  Vous pouvez du départ me laisser la conduite;              900
  Surtout de vos enfants j'assurerai la fuite.
  N'ayez soin cependant que de dissimuler.
  Contente, sur vos pas vous me verrez voler:
  La mer la plus terrible et la plus orageuse
  Est plus sûre pour nous que cette cour trompeuse.          905
  Mais à grands pas vers vous je vois quelqu'un marcher.
  C'est Hydaspe.



  SCÈNE II.

  AMAN, ZARÈS, HYDASPE.


  HYDASPE.

           Seigneur, je courais vous chercher.
  Votre absence en ces lieux suspend toute la joie;
  Et pour vous y conduire Assuérus m'envoie.


  AMAN.

  Et Mardochée est-il aussi de ce festin?                    910

  HYDASPE.

  A la table d'Esther portez-vous ce chagrin?
  Quoi? toujours de ce Juif l'image vous désole?
  Laissez-le s'applaudir d'un triomphe frivole,
  Croit-il d'Assuérus éviter la rigueur?
  Ne possédez-vous pas son oreille et son coeur?             915
  On a payé le zèle, on punira le crime;
  Et l'on vous a, Seigneur, orné votre victime.
  Je me trompe, ou vos voeux, par Esther secondés
  Obtiendront plus encor que vous ne demandez.


  AMAN.

  Croirai-je le bonheur que ta bouche m'annonce?             920


  HYDASPE.

  J'ai des savants devins entendu la réponse:
  Ils disent que la main d'un perfide étranger
  Dans le sang de la Reine est prête à se plonger;
  Et le Roi, qui ne sait où trouver le coupable,
  N'impute qu'aux seuls Juifs ce projet détestable.          925


  AMAN.

  Oui, ce sont, cher ami, des monstres furieux;
  Il faut craindre surtout leur chef audacieux.
  La terre avec horreur dès longtemps les endure;
  Et l'on n'en peut trop tôt délivrer la nature.
  Ah! je respire enfin.  Chère Zarès, adieu.                 930


  HYDASPE.

  Les compagnes d'Esther s'avancent vers ce lieu.
  Sans doute leur concert va commencer la fête.
  Entrez, et recevez l'honneur qu'on vous apprête.



  SCÈNE III.

  ÉLISE, LE CHOEUR.

  (_Ceci se récite sans chant_.)


  UNE LES ISRAÉLITES.

  C'est Aman.


  UNE AUTRE.

            C'est lui-même, et j'en frémis, ma soeur.



  LA PRÈMIERE.

  Mon coeur de crainte et d'horreur se resserre.             935


  L'AUTRE.

    C'est d'Israël le superbe oppresseur.


  LA PRÈMIERE.

      C'est celui qui trouble la terre.


  ÉLISE.

  Peut-on, en le voyant, ne le connaître pas?
  L'orgueil et le dédain sont peints sur son visage.


  UNE ISRAÉLITE.

  On lit dans ses regards sa fureur et sa rage.              940


  UNE AUTRE.

  Je croyais voir marcher la Mort devant ses pas.


  UNE DES PLUS JEUNES.

  Je ne sais si ce tigre a reconnu sa proie;
  Mais en nous regardant, mes soeurs, il m'a semblé
  Qu'il avait dans les yeux une barbare joie,
    Dont tout mon sang est encore troublé.                   945


  ÉLISE.

  Que ce nouvel honneur va croître son audace!
      Je le vois, mes soeurs, je le voi:
  A la table d'Esther l'insolent près du Roi
        A déjà pris sa place.


  UNE DES ISRAÉLITES.

  Ministres du festin, de grâce dites-nous,                  950
  Quels mets à ce cruel, quel vin préparez-vous?


  UNE AUTRE.

  Le sang de l'orphelin,


  UNE TROISIEME.

                        Les pleurs des misérables,


  LA SECONDE.

      Sont ses mets les plus agréables.


  LA TROISIEME.

      C'est son breuvage le plus doux.


  ÉLISE.

  Chères soeurs, suspendez la douleur qui vous presse.       955
  Chantons, on nous t'ordonne; et que puissent nos chants
  Du coeur d'Assuérus adoucir la rudesse,
  Comme autrefois David par ses accords touchants
  Calmait d'un roi jaloux la sauvage tristesse!

        (_Tout le reste de cette scene est chante_.)


  UNE ISRAÉLITE.

        Que le peuple est heureux,                           960
        Lorsqu'un roi genéreux,
  Craint dans tout l'univers, veut encore qu'on l'aime!
    Heureux le peuple! heureux le roi lui-même!


  TOUT LE CHOEUR.

      O repos! ô tranquillité!
  O d'un parfait bonheur assurance éternelle,                965
      Quand la suprême autorité
  Dans ses conseils a toujours auprès d'elle
      La justice et la vérité!


  (_Ces quatre stances sont chantées alternativement par
  une voix seule et par tout le choeur_.)

  UNE ISRAÉLITE.

           Rois, chassez la calomnie.
           Ses criminels attentats                           970
           Des plus paisibles États
           Troublent l'heureuse harmonie,

           Sa fureur, de sang avide,
           Poursuit partout l'innocent.
           Rois, prenez soin de l'absent                     975
           Contre sa langue homicide.

           De ce monstre si farouche
           Craignez la feinte douceur.
           La vengeance est dans son coeur,
           Et la pitié dans sa bouche.                       980

           La fraude adroite et subtile
           Sème de fleurs son chemin;
           Mais sur ses pas vient enfin
           Le repentir inutile.


  UNE ISRAÉLITE _seule_.

  D'un souffle l'aquilon écarte les nuages,                  985
    Et chasse au loin la foudre et les orages.
  Un roi sage, ennemi du langage menteur,
  Écarte d'un regard le perfide imposteur.


  UNE AUTRE.

      J'admire un roi victorieux,
  Que sa valeur conduit triomphant en tous lieux,            990
    Mais un roi sage et qui hait l'injustice,
    Qui sous la loi du riche impérieux
  Ne souffre point que le pauvre gémisse,
    Est le plus beau présent des cieux.


  UNE AUTRE.

          La veuve en sa défense espère.                     995


  UNE AUTRE.

        De l'orphelin il est le père;


  TOUTES ENSEMBLE.

  Et les larmes du juste implorant son appui
      Sont précieuses devant lui.


  UNE ISRAÉLITE _seule_.

  Détourne, Roi puissant, détourne tes oreilles
    De tout conseil barbare et mensonger.                   1000
        Il est temps que tu t'éveilles:
  Dans le sang innocent ta main va se plonger,
        Pendant que tu sommeilles.
  Détourne, Roi puissant, détourne tes oreilles
    De tout conseil barbare et mensonger.                   1005


  UNE AUTRE.

  Ainsi puisse sous toi trembler la terre entière:
  Ainsi puisse à jamais contre tes ennemis
  Le bruit de ta valeur te servir de barrière!
  S'ils t'attaquent, qu'ils soient en un moment soumis.

    Que de ton bras la force les renverse;                  1010
    Que de ton nom la terreur les disperse;
  Que tout leur camp nombreux soit devant tes soldats
    Comme d'enfants une troupe inutile;
  Et si par un chemin il entre en tes États,
          Qu'il en sorte par plus de mille.                 1015



  SCÈNE IV.

  ASSUÉRUS, ESTHER, AMAN, ÉLISE, LE CHOEUR.


  ASSUÉRUS, _à Esther_.

  Oui, vos moindres discours ont des grâces secrètes;
  Une noble pudeur à tout ce que vous faites
  Donne un prix que n'ont point ni la pourpre ni l'or.
  Quel climat renfermait un si rare trésor?
  Dans quel sein vertueux avez-vous pris naissance?         1020
  Et quelle main si sage éleva votre enfance?
  Mais dites promptement ce que vous demandez:
  Tous vos desirs, Esther, vous seront accordés,
  Dussiez-vous, je l'ai dit, et veux bien le redire,
  Demander la moitié de ce puissant empire.                 1025


  ESTHER.

  Je ne m'égare point dans ces vastes désirs.
  Mais puisqu'il faut enfin expliquer mes soupirs,
  Puisque mon roi lui-même à parler me convie,
            (Elle se jette aux pieds du Roi.)
  J'ose vous implorer, et pour ma propre vie,
  Et pour les tristes jours d'un peuple infortuné,          1030
  Qu'à périr avec moi vous avez condamné.


  ASSUÉRUS, _la relevant_.

  A périr?  Vous?  Quel peuple?  Et quel est ce mystère?


  AMAN _tout bas_.

  Je tremble.


  ESTHER.

            Esther, Seigneur, eut un Juif pour son père.
  De vos ordres sanglants vous savez la rigueur.


  AMAN.

  Ah! dieux!


  ASSUÉRUS.

            Ah! de quel coup me percez-vous le coeur?       1035
  Vous la fille d'un Juif?  Hé quoi? tout ce que j'aime,
  Cette Esther, l'innocence et la sagesse même,
  Que je croyais du ciel les plus chères amours,
  Dans cette source impure aurait puisé ses jours?
  Malheureux!


  ESTHER.

                Vous pourrez rejeter ma prière.             1040
  Mais je demande au moins que, pour grâce dernière,
  Jusqu'a la fin, Seigneur, vous m'entendiez parler,
  Et que surtout Aman n'ose point me troubler.


  ASSUÉRUS.

  Parlez.


  ESTHER.

          O Dieu, confonds l'audace et l'imposture,
  Ces Juifs, dont vous voulez délivrer la nature,           1045
  Que vous croyez, Seigneur, le rebut des humains,
  D'une riche contrée autrefois souverains,
  Pendant qu'ils n'adoraient que le Dieu de leurs pères,
  Ont vu bénir le cours de leurs destins prospères.

    Ce Dieu, maître absolu de la terre et des cieux,        1050
  N'est point tel que l'erreur le figure à vos yeux.
  L'Éternel est son nom.  Le monde est son ouvrage;
  Il entend les soupirs de l'humble qu'on outrage,
  Juge tous les mortels avec d'égales lois,
  Et du haut de son trône interroge les rois.               1055
  Des plus fermes États la chute épouvantable,
  Quand il veut, n'est qu'un jeu de sa main redoutable.
  Les Juifs à d'autres dieux osèrent s'adresser:
  Roi, peuples, en un jour tout se vit disperser.
  Sous les Assyriens leur triste servitude                  1060
  Devint le juste prix de leur ingratitude.

    Mais pour punir enfin nos maîtres à leur tour,
  Dieu fit choix de Cyrus avant qu'il vît le jour,
  L'appela par son nom, le promit à la terre,
  Le fit naître, et soudain l'arma de son tonnerre,         1065
  Brisa les fiers remparts et les portes d'airain,
  Mit des superbes rois la dépouille en sa main,
  De son temple détruit vengea sur eux l'injure.
  Babylone paya nos pleurs avec usure.
  Cyrus, par lui vainqueur, publia ses bienfaits,           1070
  Regarda notre peuple avec des yeux de paix,
  Nous rendit et nos lois et nos fêtes divines;
  Et le temple déjà sortait de ses ruines.
  Mais de ce roi si sage héritier insensé,
  Son fils interrompit l'ouvrage commencé,                  1075
  Fut sourd à nos douleurs.  Dieu rejeta sa race,
  Le retrancha lui-même, et vous mit en sa place.

    Que n'espérions-nous point d'un roi si généreux?
  «Dieu regarde en pitié son peuple malheureux,
  Disions-nous: un roi règne, ami de l'innocence.»          1080
  Partout du nouveau prince on vantait la clémence:
  Les Juifs partout de joie en poussèrent des cris.
  Ciel! verra-t-on toujours par de cruels esprits
  Des princes les plus doux l'oreille environnée,
  Et du bonheur public la source empoisonnée?               1085
  Dans le fond de la Thrace un barbare enfanté
  Est venu dans ces lieux souffler la cruauté.
  Un ministre ennemi de votre propre gloire. . . .


  AMAN.

  De votre gloire?  Moi?  Ciel!  Le pourriez-vous crone?
  Moi, qui n'ai d'autre objet ni d'autre dieu. . . .


  ASSUÉRUS.

                          Tais-toi.                         1090
  Oses-tu donc parler sans l'ordre de ton roi?


  ESTHER.

  Notre ennemi cruel devant vous se déclare:
  C'est lui.  C'est ce ministre infidèle et barbare,
  Qui, d'un zèle trompeur à vos yeux revêtu,
  Contre notre innocence arma votre vertu.                  1095
  Et quel autre, grand Dieu! qu'un Scythe impitoyable
  Aurait de tant d'horreurs dicté l'ordre effroyable?
  Partout l'affreux signal en même temps donné
  De meurtres remplira l'univers étonné.
  On verra, sous le nom du plus juste des princes,          1100
  Un perfide étranger désoler vos provinces,
  Et dans ce palais même, en proie à son courroux,
  Le sang de vos sujets regorger jusqu'à vous.

  Et que reproche aux Juifs sa haine envenimée?
  Quelle guerre intestine avons-nous allumée?               1105
  Les a-t-on vus marcher parmi vos ennemis?
  Fut-il jamais au joug esclaves plus soumis?
  Adorant dans leurs fers le Dieu qui les châtie,
  Pendant que votre main sur eux appesantie
  A leurs persécuteurs les livrait sans secours,            1110
  Ils conjuraient ce Dieu de veiller sur vos jours,
  De rompre des méchants les trames criminelles,
  De mettre votre trône à l'ombre de ses ailes.
  N'en doutez point, Seigneur, il fut votre soutien.
  Lui seui mit à vos pieds le Parthe et l'Indien,           1115
  Dissipa devant vous les innombrables Scythes,
  Et renferma les mers dans vos vastes limites.
  Lui seul aux yeux d'un Juif découvrit le dessein
  De deux traîtres tout prêts à vous percer le sein.
  Hélas! ce Juif jadis m'adopta pour sa fille.              1120


  ASSUÉRUS.

  Mardochée?


  ESTHER.

            Il restait seui de notre famille.
  Mon père était son frère.  Il descend comme moi
  Du sang infortuné de notre premier roi.
  Plein d'une juste horreur pour un Amalécite,
  Race que notre Dieu de sa bouche a maudite,               1125
  Il n'a devant Aman pu fléchir les genoux,
  Ni lui rendre un honneur qu'll ne croit dû qu'à vous.
  De là contre les Juifs et contre Mardochée
  Cette haine, Seigneur, sous d'autres noms cachée.
  En vain de vos bienfaits Mardochée est paré:              1130
  A la porte d'Aman est déjà préparé
  D'un infâme trépas l'instrument exécrable.
  Dans une heure au plus tard ce vieillard vénérable,
  Des portes du palais par son ordre arraché,
  Couvert de votre pourpre y doit être attaché.             1135


  ASSUÉRUS.

  Quel jour mêlé d'horreur vient effrayer mon âme?
  Tout mon sang de colère et de honte s'enflamme.
  J'étais donc le jouet. . . .  Ciel, daigne m'éclairer.
  Un moment sans témoins cherchons à respirer.
  Appelez Mardochée, il faut aussi l'entendre.              1140
              (_Le Roi s'éloigne_.)


  UNE ISRAÉLITE.

  Vérité, que j'implore, achève de descendre!



  SCÈNE V.

  ESTHER, AMAN, LE CHOEUR.


  AMAN, _à Esther_.

  D'un juste étonnement je demeure frappé;
  Les ennemis des Juifs m'ont trahi, m'ont trompé.
  J'en atteste du Ciel la puissance suprême.
  En les perdant j'ai cru vous assurer vous-même.           1145
  Princesse, en leur faveur, employez mon crédit:
  Le Roi, vous le voyez, flotte encore interdit.
  Je sais par quels ressorts on le'pousse, on l'arrête,
  Et fais, comme il me plaît, le calme et la tempête.
  Les intérêts des Juifs déjà me sont sacrés.               1150
  Parlez: vos ennemis aussitôt massacrés,
  Victimes de la foi que ma bouche vous jure,
  De ma fatale erreur répareront l'injure.
  Quel sang demandez-vous?


  ESTHER.

                        Va, traître, laisse-moi.
  Les Juifs n'attendent rien d'un méchant tel que toi.      1155
  Misérable, le Dieu vengeur de l'innocence,
  Tout prêt à te juger, tient déjà sa balance.
  Bientôt son juste arrêt te sera prononcée.
  Tremble.  Son jour approche, et ton règne est passé.


  AMAN.

  Oui, ce Dieu, je l'avoue, est un Dieu redoutable.         1160
  Mais veut-il que l'on garde une haine implacable?
  C'en est fait: mon orgueil est forcé de plier;
  L'inexorable Aman est réduit à prier.
          (_Il se jette à ses pieds_.)
  Par le salut des Juifs, par ces pieds que j'embrasse,
  Par ce sage vieillard, l'honneur de votre race,           1165
  Daignez d'un roi terrible apaiser le courroux.
  Sauvez Aman, qui tremble à vos sacrés genoux.



  SCÈNE VI.

  ASSUÉRUS, ESTHER, AMAN, ÉLISE, GARDES, LE CHOEUR.


  ASSUÉRUS.

  Quoi? le traître sur vous porte ses mains hardies?
  Ah! dans ses yeux confus je lis ses perfidies;
  Et son trouble, appuyant la foi de vos discours,          1170
  De tous ses attentats me rappelle le cours.
  Qu'à ce monstre à l'instant l'âme soit arrachée;
  Et que devant sa porte, au lieu de Mardochée,
  Apaisant par sa mort et la terre et les cieux,
  De mes peuples vengés il repaisse les yeux.               1175
            (_Aman est emmené par les Gardes_.)



  SCÈNE VII.

  ASSUÉRUS, ESTHER, MARDOCHÉE, ÉLISE, LE CHOEUR.


  ASSUÉRUS _continue en s'adressant à Mardochée_.

  Mortel chéri du ciel, mon salut et ma joie,
  Aux conseils des méchants ton roi n'est plus en proie.
  Mes yeux sont dessillés, le crime est confondu.
  Viens briller près de moi dans le rang qui t'est dû.
  Je te donne d'Aman les biens et la puissance;             1180
  Possède justement son injuste opulence.
  Je romps le joug funeste où les Juifs sont soumis;
  Je leur livre le sang de tous leurs ennemis;
  A légal des Persans je veux qu'on les honore,
  Et que tout tremble au nom du Dieu qu'Esther adore.       1185
  Rebâtissez son temple, et peuplez vos cités;
  Que vos heureux enfants dans leurs solennités
  Consacrent de ce jour le triomphe et la gloire,
  Et qu'à jamais mon nom vive dans leur mémoire.



  SCÈNE VIII.

  ASSUÉRUS, ESTHER, MARDOCHÉE, ASAPH, ÉLISE, LE CHOEUR.


  ASSUÉRUS.

  Que veut Asaph?                                           1190


  ASAPH.

                Seigneur, le traître est expiré
  Par le peuple en fureur à moitié déchiré.
  On traîne, on va donner en spectacle funeste
  De son corps tout sanglant le misérable reste.


  MARDOCHÉE.

  Roi, qu'à jamais le Ciel prenne soin de vos jours.
  Le péril des Juifs presse, et veut un prompt secours.     1195


  ASSUÉRUS.

  Oui, je t'entends.  Allons, par des ordres contraires,
  Révoquer des méchants les ordres sanguinaires.


  ESTHER.

  O Dieu, par quelle route inconnue aux mortels
  Ta sagesse conduit ses desseins éternels!



  SCÈNE IX.

  LE CHOEUR.


  TOUT LE CHOEUR.

          Dieu fait triompher l'innocence:                  1200
          Chantons, célébrons sa puissance.


  UNE ISRAÉLITE.

  Il a vu contre nous les méchants s'assembler,
        Et notre sang prêt à couler.
  Comme l'eau sur la terre ils allaient le répandre:
      Du haut du ciel sa voix s'est fait entendre;          1205
        L'homme superbe est renversé.
        Ses propres flèches l'ont percé.


  UNE AUTRE.

      J'ai vu l'impie adoré sur la terre.
      Pareil au cèdre, il cachait dans les cieux
          Son front audacieux,                              1210
  Il semblait à son gré gouverner le tonnerre,
      Foulait aux pieds ses ennemis vaincus.
  Je n'ai fait que passer, il n'était déjà plus.


  UNE AUTRE.

  On peut des plus grands rois surprendre la justice.
          Incapables de tromper,                            1215
          Ils ont peine à s'échapper
          Des pièges de l'artifice.
  Un coeur noble ne peut soupçonner en autrui
          La bassesse et la malice.
            Qu'il ne sent point en lui.                     1220


  UNE AUTRE.

          Comment s'est calmé l'orage?


  UNE AUTRE.

  Quelle main salutaire a chassé le nuage?


  TOUT LE CHOEUR.

    L'aimable Esther a fait ce grand ouvrage.
  De l'amour de son Dieu son coeur s'est embrasé;
          Au péril d'une mort funeste                       1225
          Son zèle ardent s'est exposé.
        Elle a parlé.  Le Ciel a fait le reste.


  DEUX ISRAÉLITES.

  Esther a triomphé des filles des Persans.
  La nature et le Ciel à l'envi l'ont ornée.


  L'UNE DES DEUX.

  Tout ressent de ses yeux les charmes innocents.           1230
  Jamais tant de beauté fut-elle couronnée?


  L'AUTRE.

  Les charmes de son coeur sont encor plus puissants,
  Jamais tant de vertu fut-elle couronnée?


  TOUTES DEUX _ensemble_.

  Esther a triomphé des filles des Persans.
  La nature et le Ciel à l'envi l'ont ornée.                1235


  UNE ISRAÉLITE _seule_.

          Ton Dieu n'est plus irrité.
  Réjouis-toi, Sion, et sors de la poussière.
  Quitte les vêtements de ta captivité,
      Et reprends ta splendeur première.

  Les chemins de Sion à la fin sont ouverts.                1240
              Rompez vos fers,
              Tribus captives.
            Troupes fugitives,
        Repassez les monts et les mers.
      Rassemblez-vous des bouts de l'univers.


  TOUT LE CHOEUR.

            Rompez vos fers,
            Tribus captives.
          Troupes fugitives,
      Repassez les monts et les mers.
    Rassemblez-vous des bouts de l'univers.                 1250


  UNE ISRAÉLITE _seule_.

    Je reverrai ces campagnes si chères.


  UNE AUTRE.

    J'irai pleurer au tombeau de mes pères.


  TOUT LE CHOEUR.

        Repassez les monts et les mers.
    Rassemblez-vous des bouts de l'univers.


  UNE ISRAÉLITE _seule_.

  Relevez, relevez les superbes portiques                   1255
  Du temple où notre Dieu se plaît d'etre adoré.
  Que de l'or le plus pur son autel soit paré,
  Et que du sein des monts le marbre soit tiré.
  Liban, dépouille-toi de tes cedres antiques.
  Prêtres sacrés, préparez vos cantiques.                   1260


  UNE AUTRE.

  Dieu descend et revient habiter parmi nous.
      Terre, frémis d'allégresse et de crainte;
        Et vous, sous sa majesté sainte,
          Cieux, abaissez-vous!


  UNE AUTRE.

  Que le Seigneur est bon! que son joug est aimable!        1265
  Heureux qui dès l'enfance en connaît la douceur!
  Jeune peuple, courez à ce maître adorable!
  Les biens les plus charmants n'ont rien de comparable
  Aux torrents de plaisirs qu'il répand dans un coeur.
  Que le Seigneur est bon! que son joug est aimable!        1270
  Heureux qui dès l'enfance en connaît la douceur!


  UNE AUTRE.

          Il s'apaise, il pardonne.
        Du coeur ingrat qui l'abandonne
          Il attend le retour.
        Il excuse notre faiblesse.                          1275
        A nous chercher même il s'empresse.
        Pour l'enfant qu'elle a mis au jour
        Une mère a moins de tendresse.
  Ah! qui peut avec lui partager notre amour?


  TROIS ISRAÉLITES.

  Il nous fait remporter une illustre victoire.             1280


  L'UNE DES TROIS.

      Il nous a révélé sa gloire.


  TOUTES TROIS _ensemble_.

  Ah! qui peut avec lui partager notre amour?


  TOUT LE CHOEUR.

  Que son nom soit béni, que son nom soit chanté!
      Que l'on célèbre ses ouvrages
      Au delà des temps et des âges,                        1285
      Au delà de l'éternité!




NOTES TO PROLOGUE.

[This prologue is an afterthought, having been written to provide a
part for Mme. de Caylus, a niece of Mme. de Maintenon.  It is never
spoken on the stage, and rarely, if ever, read in French schools.  It
is here given for the sake of completeness only.]


3 ce lieu, of course is St. Cyr.

9 un roi, Louis XIV.

13 à sa porte, St. Cyr being in the vicinity of Versailles, the king's
residence.

15 cet ouvrage, the founding of this institution.

24 Louis XIV. supported foreign missions in the East and in the
_Nouveau Monde_.

31-32 Allusion is here made to the Augsburg League (1687), in which
Austria joined Sweden, Saxony, etc., for the purpose of opposing Louis
XIV.  Its leading spirit was the protestant William of Orange.

36 The pope Innocent III. was accused by Louis XIV. of aiding the
anti-Roman designs of William of Orange,

48 Allusion to the taking of Philippsburg, Mannheim and Frankenthal, in
the preceding year.

49 un fils.  The Grand Dauphin had conducted the above campaign, with
the great engineer Vauban.




NOTES TO PLAY.

2 Beni soit is the usual form.  The retained _que_ is therefore
emphatic.--_Voeux_ very frequent in poetry for _prieres_, for metrical
reasons.  The whole expression is elliptical: _qui te rend [a moi en
reponse] a_ etc.

3 Cf. Book of Esther, ii. 5, for the descent of Mordecai, and
consequently of Esther herself, his brother's daughter.

4 For tense of _fus_, see App. II., ii. B. b.

5 d'un meme is stronger than _du meme_.  Cf. l. 263.

8 Note the mode of emphasizing pronouns, Cf. ll. 23, 443, and contrast
ll. 47, 429.

9 je te fais chercher, see App. III.  Note the present tense.

10 donc, emphatic, untranslatable here.  Observe the order _quel
climat_, _quel desert_, and the reason for it.

11 eploree, quite different from _deploree_, is an adjective, meaning
"weeping," "tearful." Cf. Alfred de Musset:

  _Plantez un saule an cimetiere;
  J'aime son feuillage eplore . . ._

13 When ne . . . que = "only," _que_ precedes the word specially
qualified by the adverb in English.  Here the sense makes "only"
qualify _attendais_ rather than _la fin_.  For similar construction see
l. 373.

15 Note: _abuser quelqu'un_, "to deceive a person."
         _abuser de_, "to use improperly."
         _injurier_, "to abuse" or "insult."

16 Suse, "Shushan the palace" of the Bible, on the river Eulaeus, was
the winter residence of the first Persian kings, the Achemenidae.
Susa, Persepolis, and Ecbatana were the principal towns of, Persia, the
biblical "Elam."

18 Note the formal masc. _assis_.

20 Sion, properly one of the four hills, on which Jerusalem was built,
and often used as the name of the town itself, here stands for the
Jewish nation, to which Jerusalem stood in the same relation as Mecca
to the Mohammedans.

23 horreur, a very strong word, because expressing the physical effect
of fear (here "religious awe").  Cf. Latin _horridus_, _horresco_, etc.

24 J'ai su.  For tense, see App. II, iii. B.  Savoir is often elegantly
used = "to succeed," especially in this tense.

37 For this _Assuerus_, see Introduction, section IV.

29 ressort (lit. that which "comes out again" when pressed in) is any
mechanical "spring;" often used figuratively.

31-34 See Book of Esther, i. 10-22.   On the assumption that Assuerus
is Darius, Vashti is Atossa, daughter of Cyrus, and wife, successively,
of Cambyses II., Smerdis, and Darius, to the last of whom she bore
Xerxes and Artabazanus.

33-34 Epexegesis, or explanation, of _disgrace_.  Cf. ll. 250-252.

36 offensee, in the correct etymological sense of "wounded."  Vashti
left an "aching void" in the king's heart.

39 L'Inde, now usually _l'Indus_, is generally the river, and rarely
_India_, in Racine's writings.

40 comparaitre, always used of appearance in answer to official summons.

41 indompte, a classical epithet.  Cf. _indomitique Dahae_, Verg. Aen.
VIII. 728.  The warlike and nomadic character of the Scythians
increased in the mind their geographical remoteness.  The Parthians are
supposed to have sprung from Scythian exiles.  The two races occupied
the vast regions of north-western Asia.

45 heureux, like "happy," often = "successful."

49 agite refers of course to _il_ in l. 50.

51 The exquisite taste and modesty of the queen's narrative has been
commented upon in Introd. section IV.

54 ma race et mon pays.  We are told (Book of Esther, ii. 5-7) that
Mordecai, who had taken Esther for his daughter, had been carried away
from Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar; whence it follows that Esther, too,
was not only a Jewess by race, but a native of Palestine.  The Book of
Esther (ii. 20) says she had not showed "her kindred nor her people."

56 peuple means: 1. "nation;" 2. "mass of common people," in
contradistinction to _la noblesse_; 3. "crowd."

57 intérêt, whose meaning is always "a matter of interest," will have
to be variously translated; e.g., "prize," "cause," "need," etc.

58 arrêt is the decision at which, when reached, a "stop" is made.
Hence, "decree," "edict," and here "doom."

59 brigue is correctly defined by Mr. Saintsbury as "the whole process
of endeavoring to secure a favor by interest and
influence."--_Suffrages_ is here used of the claims to preference put
forward by each.

69 Note that tandis que has two uses: 1 "during the time that," and 2.
"whereas."  _Pendant que_ has only the former.

75 dès has always the force of "as early as," but the translation must
vary.

79-80 Cf. Book of Esther, ii. 18: "And he made a release to the
provinces and gave gifts . . ."  Line 80 is figurative: the king's
releases and gifts did not actually "invite" the masses of his subjects
(see N. to l. 56) to the royal nuptials, but "made them partake of the
joy" of these nuptials.--_Leurs princes_ = Ahasuerus and his new queen.
_Leurs_, a _constructio ad sensum_ with the collective singular
_peuple_.

84 Literally true of the then known world, since the one hundred and
twenty-seven provinces of the Persian Empire extended from the Indus in
the East to the Hellespont in the West.

88 sont cessées.  _Cesser_ was both transitive and intransitive, as
early as the sixteenth century: hence the passive is legitimate, and
lays additional stress on the state resulting from the action.

89 ennuis = "troubles."  _Trouble_ (cf. l. 1170) = "agitation."

92 encor.  See App. I, Metre.

96 jusque has always the force of "as far as," but must be variously
translated.

98 avis. Cf.: _C'est moit avis.--Avis au lecteur.--Quand je serai prêt,
je vous en donnerai avis.--Le Président prit l'avis de la chambre.--Il
donne trof d'avis.

99 découvrir here, as several times in this play, "to reveal."  Cf.
Merchant of Venice, (Act II. Sc. vii.) "Draw aside the curtains and
discover the several caskets."

Pratiques, like our "practices," always unfavorable when = "doings."

100 domestiques = "officers of the household."  The "Rest of the Book
of Esther" gives their names, Gabatha and Tharra, and states that they
were keepers of the palace (xii. 1).

101-110 These lines are a graceful allusion to St. Cyr, and to Mme. de
Maintenon herself.  See Introd. section III.

105 profanes, here, as in l. 155, is an especially apt word, since it
suggests not only the seclusion in which these maidens live within the
palace, but also the difference between their religion and that of the
court.

108 me cherchant moi-même, "seeking [communion with] myself."

114 A fine antithesis.  Cf. Oedipus Rex, l. l: Kudmou tou palai nia
trophe.  120 (Heading) Endroit or _lieu_ is the general word for a
"place" or "spot."  _Place_ is the place to which a thing belongs.

123 De tous côtes and de toutes parts (l. 148) = both "on all sides"
and "from all sides."

126 jusques.  See App. I, Metre.  The "_s_" is due to the tendency of
adverbial words to assume a final "s."  Cf. _sans_ from _sine_, _alors_
from _ad illam horam_.

132 déplorable, a fine etymological use of the word; now only used in
the derived meaning "sad" or "wretched."

139 ta douleur retracée = _le recit de ta douleur_.  This is a Latin
construction of frequent occurrence in this play.  Cf. _post urbem
conditam_ = "after the founding of the city."  The past participle
qualifying the noun takes the place of our abstract substantive.

140 n'occupe.  _Pas_ is omitted after _si_ whenever the affirmative
idea is predominant.  Tr.: "unless."

146 relever.  See App. III.

149 tes peuples.  Cf. l. 19, and N. to l. 56.

155 This interview is a departure from the Book of Esther, where
Mordecai, in accordance with Eastern custom, can do no more than "walk
before the court of the women's house" (ii. II).

s'ose avancer is an elegant order for _ose s'avancer_.  The peculiarity
is that _oser_ is here used as though it were one of the two
auxiliaries _avoir and _être_, which alone must separate the oblique
conjunctives from their governing verb.  Cf. ll. 231, 471.  We shall
find several other such pseudo-auxiliaries.

156 père, figuratively, of course.

160 enfin must be variously translated.  It can have the force of: 1.
"at length;" 2. "too," at the end of an enumeration; 3. "in short;" 4.
"still," or, "after all;" 5. "in the end."

164 c'est fait de . . .  = _actum est de_. . . .  See also App. V, ii.
D.

166 Devoir means 1. "to owe;" 2. "to have to," "must" expressing either
physical necessity (e.g., "You must be tired") or moral obligation; 3.
"to be [about] to;" e.g., "I am to be queen of the May."

170 race d'Amalécite, in apposition to _Aman_, is infinitely more
contemptuous than the equally metrical _de race amalécite_.  Tr. "of
the brood of Amalek."  Cf. Book of Esther, iii. 1, where Haman is
stated to be descended from Agag, king of the Amalekites.

171 crèdit:--"personal influence," which Haman has used as a weapon to
strike down his foes.

173 prévenir means: 1. "to forestall," 2. "to give notice" (l. 203),
"to warn," i.e., to forestall the mishap; 3. "to prejudice," i.e., to
forestall impartial judgment, as here.

174 en horreur à.  Cf. _odio esse alicui_, and _en proie à (l. 1177).
See App. V, i.

176 pris.  Cf. _prendre jour avec quelqu'un_ = "to make an appointment."

182 les restes, very strong when applied to persons.

183 See l. 140, N.

189 Note the agreement of the adverb.--_Le feu de_ = "the fire that
inspired . . ."

194 affecte = "claims."  The word is very skillfully chosen.  It
conveys, without the slightest disrespect, Esther's sense of the
arbitrary character of this law.

203 _sans [que je puisse] le prévenir_.  The queen may not even inform
the king of her desire to speak with him.

208 Que dis-je? = "Nay!"

209 sang, a frequent metonymy for _race_, as in English.

211 Book of Esther, iv. 14: "and who knoweth whether thou art not come
to the kingdom for such a time as this?"

214 vain--"idle," "useless."  Cf. "in vain."

216 ses saints = "his holy ones."

218 d'un enfant, and not _d'une enfant_, because the statement is
general.  The next line appeals to Esther directly, hence the fem.
heureuse.

221 peuvent = "can avail."

226 Cf. Isaiah, xl. 17.  "All the nations are as nothing before him;
they are counted to him less than nothing."

227 trépas (from _trans_ and low Latin _passare_) is the passing across
the boundary of life.  Cf. our two uses of "trespass."

230 que is here a survival from the very frequent construction which
begins with _c'est: c'est, sans doute, que_. . .-_Éprouver_ has either
an active sense, "to put to the test," or a passive, "to experience."

232 The addition of _bien_ to _vouloir_ weakens the meaning from strong
volition to condescension.  Here: "has deigned."  Cf. l. 357.
Similarly _aimer_ =  "to love," but _aimer bien_ = "to like."

234 en.  See App. V, ii. C.

237 cette grâce, i.e., of being the instrument of our delivery.  The
statement is of course hypothetical, and the future is used, instead of
the conditional, only for greater directness and force.

238 toute votre race, obviously "thou and thy father's house," Book of
Esther, iv. 14.

240 assidus à prier is the order.

242 jeûne, from _jejunum_.  Cf. our "jejune."

245 "And if I perish, I perish," Book of Esther, iv. 16.  _Contente_,
now colloquially = our "glad," has here its truest sense of "satisfied."

247 Qu'on s'éloigne.  The touch of dignity added to the command by the
use of the indefinite pronoun, can hardly be translated.  For the
following prayer, see Introd. section IV.

259 sert has here its full etymological meaning of "being a slave."
Its other meanings are: 2. with _de_, "to serve as," "to be used for,"
l. 843; 3. with accus. "to serve" a person, a cause, etc., l. 336; 4.
with dative, "to be of use" to a person or for a purpose, l. 333.

200 veut, as often, = "seek to."  Note that the _de_ before _être_ is
not dependent on _peu_, but is the regular preposition introducing an
infinitive not at the beginning of a sentence.--For _vouloir_, used as
a pseudo-auxiliary, see l. 155, N.

261 Insulter, like _applaudir_, is used with the accus. in a literal,
with the dat. in a figurative, sense.

262 Imputer always implies that you charge a person with an _offence_.
Here there is a slight hypallage: the offence lies in the fact that the
conqueror dares to credit his false gods with his triumph, and not, as
the words would literally signify, in that with which he credits them.

263 Note that adjectives at the end of the line are strongly emphatic.

266 Foi means: 1. "faith," l. 256; 2. "loyalty," l. 375; 3. "truth," as
here; 4. "promise," l. 1152.  If the Jews were annihilated, the Saviour
promised by God to the seed of Abraham could not be born to them.

277 où, frequently used for the dat. of relative pron. referring to
things.

299 Il fut is elegant for _il y eut_.  Cf. l. 477.  For the tense, see
App. II, ii. B. b.

309 Arracher is "to snatch away," "to pull off" or "up;" _déchirer_ is
"to tear into pieces."

332 Note that autrui can never be nominative.

333 Que.  See App. IV, 1. A.

347 Ni is almost always followed by _ne_ without _pas_, because _ne_ is
only attended by its intensifying particle _pas_ when used as the sole
negative in the clause, without any accompanying _rien_, _jamais_,
_aucun_, etc.  Here, therefore, there should be no _pas_.  Its
introduction creates a sort of anacoluthon, and throws great stress on
the negative.

364 When Pharaoh's host was swallowed up by the Red Sea.

367 paille légère = "chaff."

373 ne . . . que.  Cf. l. 13, N.

375 en.  See App. V, ii. E.

382 Tout ce . . . de mystères is a construction framed on the analogy
of genitives following adverbs of quantity.

386 fait and not _faite_.  See App. III.

392 fuit is the present tense because _qui le fuit_ is equivalent to an
adjective.

404 The story is that, at the death of Gomates, the candidates to the
throne of Persia, unable to settle their rival claims, agreed that he
should be king whose horse should neigh first after sunrise, and that
Darius won the crown through the wit of his servant who led a mare to
the appointed spot in advance.  See Herodotus, III. 85-86.

405 idée, by frequent metonymy for _esprit_.

406 Chaldaea was famous for its astronomers, who had fixed the duration
of the year, were acquainted with the zodiac, and as early as the
middle of the fourth century B.C., already possessed astronomical
records extending over 1,900 years.  They were also far-famed
astrologers, and as such were in great demand as late as the last years
of the Roman empire.

415 eut du ciel.  Cf. Gray's Elegy: "He gained from heaven, 'twas all
he asked," etc.

419 Striking witness is borne to Haman's high position by the flattery
paid him by Hydaspes.

426 Tout révère, for _tous révèrent_, for metrical reasons.  See App.
I, Metre.

430 Traiter de = "to call," always with an unfavorable connotation.

444 fragile, of course, must be translated here "broken."

445 salutaire, here "timely."

449 l'artifice.  The definite article is used distributively: = "all
artifice."

452 Racine heightens the contrast between Haman's past and present
fortunes by imagining him to have been bought for a slave, in boyhood,
by a Persian master.  This the Bible does not state, although the Rest
of the Book of Esther calls him a Macedonian (xvi, 10), but immediately
adds "and as a stranger received of us."

454 soutiens de ma puissance.  Male children were, and still are,
indispensable to prosperity in the East, as the supporters and
defenders of the family.

458 atteinte is now usually unfavorable.

459 Mardochée assis, etc.  See l. 139, N, for this Latin construction.

462 tandis que.  See l. 69, N.  _Tant que_ would have been more precise
here.

465 est . . . à.  The construction is _ad sensum_, as though _sembler_
had been used.

468 Note the use of aller as a pseudo-auxiliary.  Cf. l. 155, N.

469 C'est trop peu d'une telle . . .  The _de_ in such forms is due to
false analogy with the construction in which an infinitive in
apposition follows _c'est_, for which see l. 260, N.

477 Il fut.  See App. II, ii. B. b.

478 This line, expressive of the multitude of the Jews, heightens the
contrast with l. 480.

484 a dû.  See l. 166, N.

485-87 I Sam. xv, 7-8: "And Saul smote the Amalekites . . . and he took
Agag, the King of the Amalekites alive, and utterly destroyed all the
people with the edge of the sword."

486 vils, a classical adjective = "valueless," "contemptible."  Cf.
Merch. of Ven. ii., 4: "'tis vile, unless it may be quaintly ordered."
The flocks and herds have no value, are contemptible, as adversaries;
hence, = "helpless."  Cf. l. 522.

493 couleurs, now familiarly used for "false representations."
_J'armai_, cf. l. 171.

494 J'interessai . . . etc.  "I showed him his glory at stake."  Note
the tense of _trembla_: = "till he trembled."  See App. II, ii. B. a.

502 Cf. Gen. xvi., 12; "his hand shall be against every man, and every
man's hand against him."

504 Note Haman's concluding appeal to the greed of human nature.  He is
a crafty counsellor, as unscrupulous as he is clever.

511 For enfin, see l. 160; for the Latin construction of _le trépas
différé_, see l. 139.

519-520 There is here a slight confusion in construction.  If a comma
preceded _terrible_, _souvent_ would then be regularly dependent on
_combien_.  But there is no authority for this punctuation, and we must
supply a repeated _combien_, thus: _tu sais combien terrible . . . [il
est it combien] souvent, etc.

521 à cannot be consequent to _trop_, which always takes _pour_.  Tr.
"in tormenting me."

523 Que.  See App. IV, ii. A.

527 The imperfect for the conditional past, for greater vividness.  Cf.
"One moment more and he was a dead man" = he would have been . . .

529 veux bien.  See l. 232, N.  It is condescension on the king's part
to make a confession at all.

530.  Note that the king views himself as the father of his people: a
piece of flattery on Racine's part towards Louis XIV.

533 succès, conformably with its derivation, is here without the usual
favorable connotation.  Cf. "luck" = "good luck."--_Fureur_ expresses
aggressive madness (cf. _ira furor brevis est_), which the king assumes
could alone prompt such an attempt.

538 More indirect flattery for Louis XIV.

539 Foi.  See l. 266, N.

541 trop = "passing."  For superlative use of _si_, cf. 1021.

545 frappe = "impresses."

546 nous = "us" [kings].  See App. I, Hiatus.

547 de = "out of," "among."

548 faire valoir, lit. = "to make to have its full value;" hence, "to
set off."   Tr. "to show off."  _Nous_ is indirect obj.--_Intéressés_,
is the opposite of "disinterested."

549 Note that the French says: "there are none who _do_," instead of
"there is none who _does_," a plural due to the plural denotation of
_en_.

551 Et might well have preceded this second clause, which is parallel
to that in l. 550.

553 ["While they are only] too ready . . ."

553-554 Que l'injure échappe à ma vengeance plutôt qu'un si rare
bienfait [échappe] à ma reconnaissance.--L'injure = "wrong" here; often
= "insult."

555 Supply: "if this service went unrewarded."  Cf. Verg. Aen. I, 48-49.

558 Que.  See App. IV, ii. A.

563 Et = "Then."--_D'autant moins_ goes closely with following _que_.

569 Que.  See App. IV, ii. C.

579 Conseils = "counsels," not "councils."

583-584 An instance of dramatic "irony," by which the poet makes words
to be spoken, of which the spectator already knows the untruth.

587 gage is the same word as "wage."  Here = "reward."  Cf. "the wages
of sin is death."

593 Note que, not _à quoi_.

596 This line explains _en vain_ of l. 595.--_Pour vous régler sur eux_
. . .  = "that you should be guided by their practice."--_Près de_,
here "in comparison with," more usually "auprès de," in accordance with
the tendency to use compound forms for secondary meanings.  Cf.
_mouvoir_ and _émouvoir_; _perdu_ and _éperdu_.

597 neveux, classical for "posterity."  For _servir de_, see l. 259, N.

600-612 The construction is:

                 (  _que ce mortel . . . fût mené_;
  _j'e voudrais_ (  _que, pour comble . . ., un seigneur . . .
                 (     guidât . . . et criât . . ._

603 orné refers to _coursier_.

604 dans has the force of "through the streets of."

605 comble from Latin _cumulus_, the "heap" that tops a full measure.
Hence its connotation is generally, though not always, favorable.
E.g., _Combler de faveurs.--Le comble de l'ingratitude est de haïr ses
bienfaiteurs.--Le voleur, poursuivi, se réfugia dans les combles du
château.--Au comble de la misère_.

607 enfin, see l. 160, N.

614 This line explains ingenuously enough the reason for the statement
in l. 613.

616 il refers to preceding _ce_.

619 prétends = "mean."

622 fais--"see."

625-628 The apodosis begins with _Plus j'assure_. . . .

630 en.  See App. V, ii. C.

633 sans être attendue = "unsummoned."

635 Je me meurs.  _Se mourir_ is either more elevated in style than
_mourir_, or = "to die slowly."

637 suis-je pas?  The omission of _ne_, the one real negative particle,
is only possible as a poetical license, and is rightly very
rare.--_Frère_, a classical strong form for "friend."

644 encore un coup, = "once more."  _Coup_ enters into many idioms.
Cf. Le coup de grâce.--Le coup de l'étrier.--La ville fut prise par un
coup de main.--Venez me donner un coup de main.--Il s'est engagé par
coup de tête.--Un coup d'essai, de maître, d'éclat.--Un coup de
pied.--Après coup.--Coup sur coup.--A coup sûr.--C'est un coup monté.

648 d'effroi depends on _combien_.

649 la foudre, because the king can strike as suddenly and irresistibly
as the thunderbolt.

653 étincelle, lit. "sparkles," but here: "flashes."

654 The Parsees, in Asia, worship fire to this day.  The king here
invokes his gods, the sun and stars.

656 peine is never "physical pain."

661 se pouvoir is only used impersonally, = "to be possible."

676 en.  See App. V, ii. C.--_Astres ennemis_ is in accordance with the
astrological superstitions of the time.

678 respectable, in its full etymological sense of "worthy of respect."

681 interêt, see l. 57, N.

686 veut = "bids."

690 entre, here "above."

692 grâce devant vos yeux = "favor in your sight."

693 fûtes, in the past definite, expresses that he may have been
favorable to her in the past, in a period of time _that has come to an
end_, implying "even though he be so no more."  See App. II, ii. B. b.

701 qu'on lui fasse entendre = "give him to understand."  For dat.
_lui_, see App. III, N.

708 clartés, properly "lights;" the plural being, as often is the case,
the concrete manifestation of that quality of which the singular is the
abstract name.  Cf. "charity" and "charities."

713 Que vous semble.  See App. IV, i. B.

714 devoir is here used as a pseudo-auxiliary; see l. 155,
N,--_L'emporter_, idiomatic for "to win the day."  The substantive, for
which the fossilized pronoun _le_ stands, is uncertain.  Cf.
_l'échapper belle_, idiomatic for "to have a narrow escape."

778 Note the force of the tense: "I never [once] admired."  See App.
II, ii. B. b.

779 Note the difference between _avoir envie de_ and _porter envie a_.

799 errer is never, while "to err" is always used figuratively.

820 en.  See App. V, ii. D.

825 rejoindre = "to join."  This prefix _re_- is more freely used in
French than in English.  Cf. _recopier_ = "to copy."

826 See Book of Esther, vi. 13-14, for the few lines on which Racine
has built the two strong scenes that follow.  Also i. 6, for the
description of the grandeur of this "court of the garden of the king's
palace."

832 éclaircir is "to restore to its own brightness;" _éclairer_ is "to
throw a light from without upon."  Cf. l. 177.

835 ressentir, from _re_ + _sentir_.  Note the doubling of the "_s_,"
in order to preserve its sound as in _sentir_.  Cf. _ressembler_,
_ressource_, _ressusciter_, etc.

aussi cette félicité, i.e., the joy of having been favored as mentioned
in l. 834, as well as the pain of the affront.

836 le mal is of course a reference to ll. 618-622; _le bienfait_, to
l. 702.

838-843 Racine had great experience of court.  See Introd.
I.--_Dévorer_, figurative, "to endure in silence."  Cf. _dévorer ses
larmes_ = "to restrain one's tears."

841 essuyer, fig. = "to put up with something disagreeable," the figure
being taken from wiping up spilt liquid, as the way to make the best of
a mishap.  E.g., _Il essuya un refus--Ce vaisseau a essuyé une
tempête--Ce général avait essuyé plusieurs défaites.

842 un outrage endure.  For this Latin construction, see l. 139, N.

868 exerçant, "wielding," correctly refers to the speaker, Haman, as
the king's minister.

872 ma vie exposée, another Latin construction.

874 Que sert.  See App. IV, i. A.

881 le peuple.  Cf. l. 56, N.

890 For the spelling _voi_ (which is etymologically correct, seeing
that no first person singular ends in "s" in Lat.), see App. I, Rhyme.

892 Cf. Claudian, _In Rufinum_, I. 22, 23.
                    . . . tolluntur in altum
                  Ut lapsu graviore ruant.

894 ces bords écartés, i.e., Macedonia.  We have already referred to
Rest of the Book of Esther, xvi. 10, where Haman is described as a
Macedonian.

896-897.  See l. 485, N.

898 For enfin, see l. 160, N.

910 Note the skillful way in which the poet shows Haman so possessed
with his grief that he can entertain no other thought.

911 ce chagrin, i.e., that betrayed by l. 910.

928 dès longtemps, in prose _depuis longtemps_.  See l. 75 N.

934 en, see App. V, ii. C.

935 se resserre = "is wrung."

938 ne le connaître pas.  This position of _pas_, after the infinitive,
is elegant and emphatic.

946 croître is transitive only in poetry.

955 Suspendez = "A truce to. . . ."

956 puissent is so frequently used to express an exclamative wish, that
it usually drops the _que_, which here however is retained.

962 encore, i.e., in addition to that fear.

992 riche is the subst.--_Sous la loi_ goes closely after _gémisse_.

1008 For servir de, see l. 259, N.

1012 camp = "host."

1021 For the virtual superlative _si sage_, cf. l. 541.

1024 Dussiez-vous, = _quand même vous devriez_.  This elegant use of
the imperf. subj. with subject pronoun inverted (= _quand même_ and the
conditional) is generally confined to the auxiliaries, or
pseudo-auxiliaries, such as _savoir_, _pouvoir_, _falloir_, etc.  In
the third person sing. however, where the verb-forms are less
unwieldly, other verbs may be so used: it is a matter of euphony.--For
the previous offer, see l. 660.

1039 aurait puise.  Note this conditional past of hypothetical
statement.  It always implies that the speaker is unwilling to indorse
the statement on his own responsibility.

Jour means: 1. "day;" 2. "day-light;" 3. any "light,"; physical (as in
_un abat-jour_) or figurative, e.g., l. 1136; 4. "birth," cf. l. 1277;
5. in plural, "life."

1047 contrée, always = "region."

1050 Here begins a magnificent passage where elevation of language
almost reaches inspiration.

1053 qu'on outrage--an adj., "oppressed."

1059 See 2 Kings, xvii. 5-23.  Shalmaneser, in 718 B.C., took captive
the kingdom of Israel, and Nebuchadnezzar II., the kingdom of Juda in
606.  The captivity of the Jews under the Assyrians lasted 70 years,
606-536 B.C., when they obtained leave from Cyrus to return to
Palestine.  See Introd., section 4, Chron. Table.

1062-3 Isaiah xlv. 1-3: "Thus saith the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus,
whose right hand I have holden, to subdue nations before him, and I
will loose the loins of kings; to open the doors before him, and the
gates will not be shut, I will go before thee, and make the rugged
places plain: I will break in pieces the doors of brass, and cut in
sunder the bars of iron; and I will give thee the treasures of
darkness, and hidden riches of secret places."  For the Persian kings
of these times, see Introd. section 4.  Cyrus reigned about 560-530 B.C.

1068 son temple détruit, another Latin construction.--Nebuchadnezzar
II. destroyed the temple of Jerusalem after his capture of the city in
587 B.C.

1073 sortait, a most instructive use of the imperfect; the narrative
pauses in the succession of _events_, to lay stress on the happy
_state_ now prevailing.  See App. II, ii. A.

1075 son fils, Cambyses (reigned 529-522 B.C.).

1077 vous, on the assumption that Ahasuerus is Darius (reigned 521-485
B.C.).

1082 en.  See App. V, ii. C.

1086 La Thrace, near enough to Macedonia for the queen's oratorical
purposes.  Thracia (now N. E. Roumelia), like Scythia (l. 1096), was
then a remote and almost unknown region, whose inhabitants were all
"barbarians."

1096 sqq. Esther is supremely skillful in laying to the king's credit
all that can flatter his pride, and charging all she complains of
against this _Scythe impitoyable_: a name all the more hateful to the
king as Darius had led an army against the Scythians and lost it (513
B.C.), although Esther puts the expedition in a more flattering light
in l. 1116.

1104 Que.  See App. IV, i. A.

1123 Saul, first king of the Israelites, was the son of Kish, a
Benjamite (I Sam. ix. 1-2), and Mordecai is also stated (Book of Esther
ii. 5) to be the son of Kish, a Benjamite.

1127 Impossible to anticipate more skillfully the retort that Mordecai
should have honored the king's favorite.

1135 convert de votre pourpre makes the offence almost personal to the
king.

1136 For jour, see l. 1039, N.

1141 achever = "to finish."  Tr. "come down in thy fullness."

1146 crédit, see l. 171.

1151 vos ennemis aussitôt massacrés, another Lat. construction.  These
lines are a very skillful revelation of Haman's character; he attempts
to bribe the queen by the offer of that which would seem most desirable
to himself.

1162 en.  See App. V, ii. D.

1168 The king interprets Haman's attitude as an attempt at violence.

1175 repaisse.  Cf. Verg. Aen. VIII, 265: nequeunt expleri corda tuendo.

1190 est expiré (on the analogy of _est mort_), for _a expiré_, which
would be impossible in classical French poetry.  See App. I, Hiatus.
The result is more stress on the state, instead of on the action.

1193 Cf. Juvenal, x. 66.
                           _Seianus ducitur unco
                    Spectandus_.

1194 "O king, live forever!"

1196 entends, as very frequently, = "understand."  Note a third use:
"to understand by one's own words," i.e., "to mean."

1213 Je n'ai fait que passer may be translated: "before I had passed
by;" lit. "I only passed by," I needed not to wait, in order to witness
the short-lived triumph of the wicked.

1214 surprendre = "to take unawares."

1231 couronnée = "on the throne."

1256 se plaît de, now rather _se plaît à_.

1264 Cf. Ps. xviii. 9; "he bowed the heavens also, and came down."

1267 Jeune peuple.  Cf. l. 56, N.  There is also an allusion to the
reconstitution of the Jews as a nation, promised by the king, ll.
1182-1189.

1280 Note that nous is dative.  See App. III, N.




APPENDIX I.


FRENCH VERSE.

French verse, as found in the classical writers, consists of lines in
which the principal factor is the number of syllables (loosely called
_pieds_ in French, as well as _syllabes_), and not, as in English, the
number of accents.


METRE.

The "heroic verse," or _grand vers_ in French, is the _hexamètre_, or
_vers alexandrin_: the former name being due to the fact that this line
consists of two halves or _hémistiches_ of six syllables each; the
latter a name derived from the poet Alexandre de Bernay, who, in the
latter half of the twelfth century, first used this metre in his
celebrated epic of "_Alexandre_."

                      1   2 3  4    5  6       1   2  3    4 5   6
  E.g., Esth. l. 2.: _Que béni soit le ciel || qui te rend à mes voeux_!

Lyric poetry may have lines of any number of syllables.

  E.g., Esth. l. 1241: _Rompez vos fers_                   4 sylls.
              l.  970: _Ses criminels attentats_           7   "
              l.  722: _En un moment s'est-il évanoui_    10   "

All syllables, mute or otherwise, are counted except, (1) when a 'mute
e' is elided before a word beginning with a vowel or 'mute h,' e.g.,

         1   2  3    4       5 6
  l. 1: _Est-ce toi, chèr(e) Élis(e)?_ = 6 sylls.;

(2) at the end of a line, where the 'mute e' is reckoned with the
preceding sounded syllable, which is thus made a "feminine rhyme," e.g.;

                 1   2    3 4  5  6
  l. 7 . . . || _est cher à ma mémoire!_ = 6 sylls.

It is for this reason that Racine avails himself (ll. 92, 436, 514,
1232) of the license to spell _encor_ instead of _encore_, thereby
reducing the word by one syllable:

                   1  2    3 4   5  6
  l. 436 . . . || _le voit encor la nuit_;

and conversely he writes _jusques_ for _jusque_ before _au_, to prevent
the elision and keep the word dissyllabic, in

          1 2   3  4    5  6
  l. 136 _Sion, jusques au ciel_: || . . . .

Similarly in l. 426, for the simpler expression

   1    2 3 4    5 6 7
  _Tous révèrent à genoux_,

he writes,

   1    2 3      4 5 6
  _Tout révèr(e) à genoux_, ||

reducing the seven syllables of the former to a correct hemistich.


CAESURA.

Between the two hemistiches of an hexameter there must be a pause,
called _la césure_, or 'caesura.'


RHYME.

French poetry being less rhythmical than English, owing to the absence
of strong word-accents, makes up the deficiency by much greater stress
on rhyme.  In French verse, rhyme not only is almost indispensable, but
must, in a measure, satisfy the eye as well as the ear.  For instance,
words ending in 's' 'x' or 'z' can only rhyme with words also ending in
one of these three letters.  Hence, the use of such obsolete forms as
_voi_ for _vois_ (ll. 890, 947); the latter could not rhyme with _moi_
or _roi_.

French rhymes are called "feminine" when they have a 'mute e' in or
after their last sounded syllable; e.g., _descendue_, _mémoire_,
_armées_, _coururent_, _cabales_, _assassinaient_ are feminine rhymes.
In all other cases they are called 'masculine' rhymes.

In heroic verse the masculine and feminine rhymes are generally found
in alternating pairs.  In lyrics, however, they are freely crossed, but
with this restriction, that one rhyme of either kind is never found
next to a different one of the same kind, i.e., two _different_
masculines or feminines are never found in juxtaposition.


HIATUS.

Two sounded vowels coming together form a "hiatus."  A hiatus between a
vowel at the end of a word and another at the beginning of the next, is
forbidden.  Hence, l. 546, where the straightforward expression would
have been _lui échappe_, Racine wrote the equivalent _nous échappe_, in
order to avoid the hiatus.

Lastly, a sounded vowel, followed by an unelided 'mute e,' must be at
the end of the line.  Thus the word _Mardochée_ must always be at the
end of the line, or else be followed by a word beginning with a vowel
or 'mute h,' so that its 'mute e' may be elided.  Cf. ll. 44, 618, and
156, 459, etc.  Such words as _armées_, _joies_, etc., whose 'mute e'
cannot be elided, can never occur in the body of the line.  The only
exception is made in favor of the verb-endings in _-oient_ and
_-aient_.  Cf. ll. 527, 1111.

In French poetry, as in French grammar, 'mute h' always = a vowel, and
'aspirate h' = a consonant.

The rules given above apply to classical French poetry only.  The
modern poetical schools of the nineteenth century have been taking
liberties with them, especially with the caesura.  The latest school of
French poets, the _symbolistes_ or _décadents_ as they style
themselves, are attempting to overthrow every one.  At their hands the
caesura has finally disappeared, and the following form, called a
_ternaire_, has become possible:

   1  2  3 4     5  6  7 8     9  10   11 12
  _Où je filai | pensivement | la blanche laine_.  (Th. de Banville.)

Then the 'mute e's' are disregarded:

   1 2  3   4        5  6     7   8      9  10 11 12
  _Avec les filles | du vieux seigneur | en robes blanches_.
                                             (H. de Régnier.)

The number of syllables is of little account:

   1   2  3   4        5   6  7  8   9    10      11
  _Des mortes douces | qui moururent là | quelque soir.
                                             (H. de Régnier).

The hiatus is no longer tabooed, and lastly, not only the artificial
rules of rhyme, but rhyme itself, is being done away with: assonance
may take its place.  If the constitution of the French language did not
make it unlikely that these reforms should prove permanent, the vehicle
of French poetic thought would become mere harmonious prose.




APPENDIX II.

_THE PAST TENSES IN FRENCH_.

The English praeterite being the equivalent of three tenses in French,
it is of the utmost importance that a clear idea of the shades of
meaning conveyed by the latter should be firmly possessed.


i.

_WHENEVER REPETITION OF THE ACTION IS IMPLIED_ the IMPARFAIT is used.

The force, in English, is "used to . . .," "kept . . . -ing," etc.

E.g., Esth. l. 6: _m'aidais à soupirer_ . . . "wast wont to sigh with
me."

l. 83: . . . _disais-je_, . . . = "I would say"


ii.

_WHEN NO REPETITION OF THE ACTION IS IMPLIED_.

A. IF THE ACTION IS CONSIDERED AS BEING SIMPLY IN PROGRESS, WITHOUT
REFERENCE EITHER TO ITS BEGINNING OR TO ITS END, again the IMPARFAIT is
used.

The force, in English, is "was . . . -ing."

E.g., l. 12: _je vivais séparée_ = "I was living apart."

l. 58: . . . _attendaient leur arrêt_ = "were awaiting their doom."

B. IF THE ACTION IS STATED WITH REFERENCE EITHER TO ITS BEGINNING, OR
TO ITS END, OR TO BOTH, the PASSÉ DÉFINI is used.

Thus _a. Simple occurrence_, which is the introduction of a new action
now beginning to take place, takes the _passé défini_.

E.g., l. 19: . . . _ajouta-t-il_, . . . = "he [then] added."

l. 26: . . . _qui sauva nos aïeux_ = "which [once before] saved our
forefathers."

l. 494.: _il trembla pour sa vie_ = "he began to tremble for his life."

_b. Continuous duration through a completed period of time_ which may
be expressed or implied, takes the _passé défini_.

E.g., l. 4: . . . _fus de mes premiers ans la compagne assidue_ =
"wast the constant companion of my earliest years."

l. 272: . . . _qui ne furent jamais_ = "who never [in all time] had
existence."

l. 477: . . . _il fut des Juifs_ = "there was once [but is no more] a
race of Jews."

NOTE that the action may be stated as recurring a given or indefinite
number of times, and yet the verb will not be in the imperfect.

E.g., l. 249: _Mon pere mille fois m'a dit_ . . .

l. 531: _Et j'ai pâli deux fois_. . . .

If the imperfect were used here, the meaning would be "My father used
to tell me a thousand times," i.e., he told me 1000 X n times, and in
the second sentence, "I grew pale 2 X n times."

The student is recommended to account to himself carefully for the
different tenses used in contrast to one another in the following
passages:

ll. 4 and 6; 72 and 73; 1058 sqq. and 1073; 1074 to 1082.


PASSÉ INDÉFINI.

With regard to the third tense, the PASSÉ INDÉFINI, there is no
difficulty.  It is used:

_A_. Precisely like the English compound of the past.

E.g., l. 30: _le ciel a-t-il conduit_ . . . = "has heaven brought
about. . ."

l. 158: _a . . . conduit vos pas_ = "has guided your footsteps."

_B_. As a colloquial form of the passe defini in all its uses.

E.g., l. 24: _j'ai su trouver_ = "I succeeded in finding."

l. 399: . . . _que j'ai laissé plus calme_ = "whom I left . . ."




APPENDIX III.

_ACTIVE INFINITIVES WITH PASSIVE MEANING_.

_Faire_, _laisser_, and a very few verbs of physical perception, such
as _voir_, _entendre_, _sentir_, are idiomatically used before an
active infinitive which assumes a passive meaning.  E.g., _J'ai fait
faire un habit_, "I have had a coat made."

These constructions are due to the dropping of the obvious subject of
the infinitive ("I made [the tailor] make a coat") which must be
supplied in order to account for the form.

E.g., Esth. l. 9: . . . _je te fais chercher_ = _que je fais [mes
esclaves] te chercher.

l. 146: _Quand verrai-je relever tes remparts_ = _quand verrai-je [tes
fils] relever tes remparts_.

l. 386: _Sa voix s'est fait entendre_ = _sa voix a fait [nous] entendre
elle-même_.

l. 731: _laissant de ses eaux partager le secours_ = _laissant [cette
main] partager le secours de ses eaux_.

For other instances of this construction, see ll. 110, 181, 394, 407,
523.

This construction is possible in English: . . . "for whose sake Artemis
let slay the boar" (Swinburne, Argument of "Atalanta in Calydon.")

NOTE.  It should be borne in mind that, should the subject of the
infinitive be expressed, whenever the infinitive is _transitive_, that
subject may (and if the first verb is _faire_, must) be put in the
dative case, or in the oblique case with _par_.  Thus in l. 52,

  _Il me fit d'un empire accepter l'espérance_,

_me_ is dative and not accusative.  Similarly in l. 1280,

  _Il nous fait remporter une illustre victoire_,

_nous_ is dative.




APPENDIX IV.

QUE, _CONJUNCTIVE AND ADVERBIAL_.

The interrogative pronouns are _Qui?_ = "Who?" or "Whom?" and _quoi?_ =
"What?" the latter having the conjunctive form _que_, which, as is the
case with all conjunctives, must be used in preference to the
disjunctive form, if possible.

i.

The CONJUNCTIVE QUE is used:

_A_. Instead of accusative _quoi_:

Esth. l. 161: _Que nous annoncez-vous?_

l. 593: _Que penses-tu?_

Also ll. 637, 675, 762, 1078, 1104, etc.

In _Que sert?_ (ll. 874 and 333), the _que_ is probably the accus.
conjunctive, due to a confusion in the construction of _servir_.  (See
N. to l. 259)

_B_. Instead of nominative _quoi_, when followed by the formal subject
_ce_ or _il_.

E.g., _Qu'est-ce?  Qu'est-ce que c'est?_ etc.

Esth. l. 596: _Que sont-ils?_

l. 713: _Que vous semble?_ ( =  _Que vous semble-t-il?_)


ii.

QUE is used ADVERBIALLY:

_A_. As an interrogative = "why," followed by _ne_ and no _pas_.

E.g. Esth. l. 558: _Que n'a-t-il plus tôt demandé son salaire?_

Also, but very rarely, in the affirmative.

E.g., l. 523: _Que tardez-vous?_

_B_. As an exclamative = "how!"

E.g., l. 465: _Que ce temps est long à mon impatience!_

Also ll. 691, 735, 946.

_C_. As a relative of time = "when."

E.g., l. 569: _Sur le point que la vie_, etc.




APPENDIX V.

EN.

Reference to the derivation of this word will do much to remove the
difficulty attending a clear understanding of its various functions.


i.

EN, _PREPOSITION_, from the Latin _in_, offers no stumbling-block save
in its second use = "as" or "like."

Eg., Esth. l. 1192: _on va donner en spectacle_ = "as a spectacle."

l. 174; _il nous croit en horreur_ = "he thinks us an object of
horror."  Cf. also l. 246 and l. 1177.

In Corneille's "Le Cid" (l. 318) _vivre en infâme_ = "to live [as] an
infamous man."


ii.

EN, _CONJUNCTIVE PRONOUN_, from the Latin _inde_ ("hence," "from that,"
etc.) is used:

_A_.  As an ordinary genitive = "of" or "from it, him," "her," "them,"
etc.

_B_. As a partitive accusative; as we might say in English: "I will
take of that."

These two uses are too frequent to require illustration.

_C_. With the force of "on account of that," "for that," when it is not
always to be translated in English.

E.g., Esth. l. 234: _Nous n'en verrons pas moins_, etc. = "none the
less [for that]."  Cf. also l. 630.

l. 934: . . . _et j'en frémis = "I shudder at the sight," lit.,
"because of this," viz., because this man is Haman.

l. 1082: _Les Juifs . . . en poussèrent des cris_, i.e. on account of
this promise of mildness given by the king.

_D_. In a number of expressions where, from constant use, it has
become, so to speak, stereotyped:

E.g., l. 1144: _J'en atteste_ = "I call to witness [for the truth of
this] . . ."

l. 1162: _C'en est fait_ = "It is all over [with my pride]."  Cf. l.
164, where _c'en est fait d'Israël_ would be equally correct.

l. 820: _Il n'en est pas ainsi de_ = "such is not the case with."

_E_.  In a few semi-idiomatic expressions, with a generalizing force
due to the broadening of the meaning "on account of this," "in this
matter," into that of "in any matter."

Eg., l. 375: _on s'en peut reposer sur ma foi_ = "I am ever to be
trusted."

Cf. _Si vous m'en croyez_ = "If you will be guided by me."

NOTE.  This generalization mainly results in a figurative force; E.g.,
_En venir à_ = "to be reduced to;" _en passer par là_ = "to have to
submit to that."




  VOCABULARY

  A

  à, to, for, with, in.
  abaisser, to lower, abase; s'--, to bow down.
  abandonner, to abandon, deliver up, forsake.
  abattre, to beat down.
  abîme, m., abyss, chasm.
  abolir, to abolish, wipe out.
  abondance, f., abundance.
  abri, m., shelter; mettre à l'--, to shield.
  absolu, absolute.
  abuser, to deceive.
  accabler, to overwhelm, crush.
  accepter, to accept; ne pas --, to decline.
  accompagner, to accompany.
  accord, m., chord (_of music_).
  accorder, to grant.
  accourir, to run, flock.
  acheter, to buy.
  achever (de), to finish.
  acte, m., act.
  action, f., action, deed.
  adieu, farewell.
  admettre, to admit.
  admirer, to admire, marvel at.
  adopter, to adopt.
  adorer, to worship.
  adoucir, to soften.
  adresser (s'), to appeal,
  adroit, skilful, clever.
  adultère, criminal.
  affecter de, to claim to.
  affliger, to distress.
  affranchir, to rid.
  affreu-x, -se, hideous, awful.
  affront, m., affront, insult.
  affronter, to brave.
  âge, m., age, years.
  agir, to act; -- sur, to work upon.
  agité, tossed; -- de, disturbed, fretting over.
  agiter, to disturb.
  agneau, m., lamb.
  agreable, agreeable, sweet, acceptable.
  aider, to aid, assist.
  aïeux, m. pl., ancestors, forefathers.
  aigrir, to sour, embitter.
  aile, f., wing.
  ailleurs, elsewhere.
  aimable, lovable, sweet, easy.
  aimer, to love.
  ainsi, thus; -- quo, as well as; il en est -- de,
    such is the case with.
  airain, m., brass.
  alarme, f., alarm, fear.
  alarmé, alarmed, frightened.
  allegresse, f., joy.
  aller, to go.
  allumer, to light, kindle.
  alors, then, at the time, in those days.
  altéré de, thirsting for.
  alternativement, alternately.
  alti-er, -ère, haughty.
  Amalécite, Amalekite.
  Aman, Haman.
  amas, m., heap.
  amasser, to heap up, collect.
  amateur, m., lover.
  ame, f., soul.
  amener, to bring, bring round.
  amertume, f., bitterness.
  ami (de), m., friend (_to_).
  amitié, f., friendship, affection.
  amour, m., love.
  an, m., year.
  anéantir, to bring to naught.
  ange, m., angel.
  animé, animated; -- a, keen, bent upon; -- de, fired with.
  annales, f. pl., (_yearly_) records.
  annoncer, to announce, bring news.
  antique, ancient, aged.
  apaiser, to appease, s'--, to be appeased.
  appareil, m., show.
  appartement, m., apartment, room, private rooms.
  appeler, to call, summon, court; faire --, to summon.
  appesanti, weighing, laid heavily.
  applaudir, to applaud; s'-- de, to enjoy, rejoice in.
  apprendre, to learn, teach, tell.
  apprêter, to make ready.
  approcher (de), to draw near, be nigh to.
  appui, m., aid, support, might.
  appuyer, to confirm, s'-- sur, to lean upon.
  après, after.
  aquilon, m., north-wind.
  arbitre, m., master, lord.
  ardent, glowing.
  arme, f., arm, weapon.
  armée, f., army, host.
  armer, to arm, use as a weapon; s'--, to take up arms.
  arracher, to tear off.
  arrêt, m., decree, order, doom.
  arrêter, to restrain.
  arriver, to arrive, come round.
  artifice, m., art, artfulness, cunning, deception, malice.
  Asie, f; Asia.
  asile, m., asylum, refuge, abode.
  aspect, m., aspect, sight.
  aspirer à, to strive to.
  assassinat, m., assassination, murder.
  assassiner, to murder.
  assembler, to assemble, gather together.
  asaeoir, to seat; s'--, to sit.
  assez, enough.
  assidu (à), constant (_in_).
  assiéger, to besiege.
  assurer, to make sure, safeguard, reassure.
  astre, m.,  star (_i.e. any heavenly body_).
  atours, m. pl., attire, garments.
  attacher, to bind, fasten, rivet.
  atteinte, f., impression.
  attendre, to await, wait for, expect.
  attentat, m., crime.
  attenti-f, -ve, attentive.
  attester, to call upon.
  attirer, to attract, provoke.
  attrait, m., attraction, charm, spell.
  audace, f., audacity.
  audacieu-x, -se, audacious, bold; m., bold person.
  auguste, august, noble, royal.
  aujourd'hui, to-day.
  auprès de, near, about, by the side of.
  aurore, f., dawn.
  aussi, also.
  aussitôt, at once, instantly.
  austère, strict.
  austérité, f., austerity, seriousness.
  autant (que), as much (_as_); d'-- moins, so much the less.
  autel, m., altar.
  auteur, m., author; les --s de mes jours, the authors of my
    being; i.e. my parents.
  autre, other, different, another.
  autrefois, former, of yore.
  autrui, m., other people, others.
  avancer (s'), to advance.
  avant, before (_in time_); -- tout, first of all.
  avantage, m., advantage, privilege, merit.
  avec, with.
  avenir, m., future.
  aversion, f., aversion, dislike, hatred.
  aveugle, blind.
  aveuglement, m., blindness.
  aveugler, to blind.
  avide (de), greedy, thirsting (_for_).
  avis, m., opinion, advice, notice, information.
  avoir, to have.
  avouer, to confess,


  B

  baiser, to kiss.
  baisser, to lower.
  balance, f., scales.
  bandeau, m., fillet, (_part of royal headdress_).
  bannir, to banish.
  barbare, barbarous.
  barriere, f., barrier, rampart, defence,
  bas, -se, low.
  bassesse, f., evil.
  beau, bel, belle, beautiful
  beaucoup, much.
  beauté, f., beauty.
  bénir, to bless.
  besoin, m., need.
  bien, well.
  bien, m., blessing; --s, wealth.
  bien-fait, m., benefit, service, favor, blessing.
  bienheureu-x, -se, happy, thrice happy.
  bientôt, soon.
  blasphémer, to blaspheme.
  boire, to drink.
  bon, -ne, good, kind.
  bonheur, m., happiness, success.
  bonté, f., goodness; --s, mercies.
  bord, m., edge, shore.
  borne, f., limit.
  borner, to limit.
  bouche, f., mouth, lips.
  bout, m., end.
  bras, m., arm.
  braver, to defy.
  breuvage, m., beverage.
  bride, f., bridle.
  brigue, f., canvass, party.
  briguer, to canvass for, solicit,
  brillant, brilliant, bright.
  briller, to shine.
  briser, to break, dash.
  bruit, m., noise, rumor, report.
  but, m., goal.


  C

  cabale, f., cabal, plot.
  cacher (à), to hide (_from_).
  calme, m., calm, peace.
  calme, calm.
  calmer, to calm.
  calomnie, f., calumny.
  campagne, f., fields.
  cantique, m., hymn.
  caprice, m., fickleness, capriciousness.
  capti-f, -ve, m., f., captive, prisoner, slave; also adj.
  captivité, f., captivity.
  carnage, m., slaughter.
  cause, f., case.
  causer, to cause, give.
  ce, cet, m., cette, f., this, that, it; ces, pl.,
    these, those.
  cèdre, m., cedar.
  célèbre, celebrated, famous.
  célébrer, to celebrate, sing.
  celui, m., celle, f., he, she, the one;
    ceux, m. pl; celles, f. pl., those.
  cendre, f., ashes.
  cent, a hundred.
  cependant, meanwhile, however.
  certain, certain, assured.
  cesser, to cease.
  chacun, each.
  chagrin, m., grief, gloom.
  Chaldée, f., Chaldaea.
  Chaldéen, m., Chaldee.
  chaleur, f., heat, warmth.
  chambre, f., chamber, room.
  champ, m., field.
  chanceler, to stagger, waver.
  chant, m., song.
  chanter, to sing.
  chaque, each, every,
  charmant, delightful.
  charmer, to charm, soothe.
  chasser, to chase, drive away.
  châtier, to chastise, punish.
  châtiment, m., punishment.
  chef, m., chief.
  chemin, m., road, path, way.
  ch-er, -ère, dear, precious.
  chercher, to seek.
  chéri, cherished, beloved.
  chérir, to love, cherish.
  cheveux, m. pl., hair.
  chez, at _or_ in, _or_ to the house _or_ apartments of.
  choeur, m., chorus.
  choisir, to choose.
  choix, m., choice.
  chose, f., thing; quelque --, something, anything.
  chute, f., fall, downfall.
  ciel, m., cieux, pl., sky, heaven.
  cilice, m., hair-shirt.
  clarté, f., tight; --s, wisdom.
  clemence, f., clemency, mercy.
  climat, m., climate, clime.
  coeur, m., heart.
  colère, f., anger, wrath.
  colombe, f., dove.
  combat, m., battle.
  combattre, to combat, fight.
  combien, how, how much.
  comble, m., height; pour -- de gloire, for crowning glory.
  combler de, to load with (_good things_).
  commander, to command, bid.
  comme, as, like, how.
  commencer, to begin.
  commettre, to commit; entrust.
  compagne, f., companion.
  comparaître, to appear (_in answer to summons_).
  comparer, to compare.
  complot, m., plot.
  compter, to count, reckon, hold.
  condamnable, blameworthy.
  condamner, to condemn.
  conduire, to conduct, lead, guide, bring about.
  conduite, f., conduct, practice; ordering, management.
  confiance, f., trust.
  confident, -e, confidant, confidential friend.
  confier, to confide; se -- to trust.
  confondre, to confound, put to confusion.
  conforme, suitable.
  confus, confused, troubled.
  conjurer, to beseech.
  connaître, to know, distinguish, spare.
  consacrer, to commemorate.
  conseil, m., counsel, advice; council.
  conserver, to preserve.
  conspirer, to agree.
  consulter, to consult.
  consumer, to consume.
  contempler, to gaze upon.
  content, glad, satisfied.
  contenter, to satisfy.
  coner, to relate.
  contraire, contrary; au --, on the contrary.
  contre, against.
  contrée, f., region, land.
  contre-temps, m., untoward event, accident.
  convier, to invite.
  corps, m., body.
  corriger, to correct.
  côté, m., side; de tous --s, on all sides.
  couchant, m., setting sun, west.
  couler, to now.
  couleur, f., color, false color, false reason.
  coup, m., blow; tout à --, suddenly; encore un --, once more.
  coupable, guilty; m., offender.
  coupe, f., cup, goblet.
  couple, m., pair.
  cour, f., court.
  courber, to bend; se -- to bow down.
  courir, to run.
  couronner, to crown.
  courroux, m., wrath.
  cours, m., course, vent.
  coursier, m., charger (_horse_).
  couteau, m., (_sacrificial_) knife.
  couvrir, to cover.
  craindre, to fear.
  crainte, f., fear.
  crédit, m., influence, power.
  crédule, credulous.
  cri, m., cry.
  crier, to shout.
  criminel, criminal.
  croire, to believe, think.
  croître, to increase.
  cruauté, f., cruelty.
  culte, m., worship, religion.
  curieu-x, -se, curious, inquisitive; désir --, curiosity.


  D

  daigner, to condescend, deign.
  danger, m., danger, peril.
  dans, in, into, to.
  de, of, from, by, with, in, on, among.
  débris, m., wreck, ,ruins.
  déceler, to betray.
  déchirer, to tear up.
  déclamer, to declaim, speak.
  déclarer, to declare.
  découvrir, to disclose, reveal.
  dédaigner, to spurn.
  dédain, m., disdain.
  dédans, au --, within.
  dédier, to dedicate.
  défendre, to defend, forbid.
  défense, f., defence, protection.
  degré, m., step (_in a flight of stairs_).
  déguiser, to disguise.
  dehorg; au --, outside, without.
  déjà, already.
  delà, au --, beyond.
  délices, f. pl., delights.
  délivrer, to rid.
  demlain, to-morrow.
  demander, to ask,
  demeurer, to remain.
  démon, m., devil.
  dépendre (de), to depend (_upon_), rest (_with_).
  dépit, m., vexation, wrath.
  déplorable, deplorable, miserable, woful.
  déployer, to unfold, stretch forth.
  déposer, to deposit, lay down.
  dépôt, m., deposit, thing entrusted, trust.
  dépouille, f., spoils.
  dépouiller, to strip, put off.
  depuis, since, for.
  derni-er, -ère, last.
  dérober (se) à, to steal away from.
  derrière, behind.
  des, as early as, in; -- longtemps, for a long time past.
  descendre, to descend, come down, be descended.
  désert, m., desert.
  désespoir, m., despair.
  désir, m., desire, wish; -- curieux, curiosity.
  désolé, distressed, miserable.
  désoler, to distress, decimate.
  désordre, m., disorder, confusion.
  désormais, henceforth.
  dessein, m., design.
  dessiller, to open (_the eyes_).
  destin, m., fate.
  destinée, f., destiny, fate.
  détacher, to divert.
  detestable, abominable.
  détester, to detest, hate.
  détourer, to turn away, avert, deflect.
  détruire, to destroy.
  deux, two.
  devancer, to anticipate, come before, rise before.
  devant, before, in front of, in the sight of.
  développer, to unravel.
  devenir, to become.
  devin, m., seer.
  devoir, to owe, have to, be to.
  devoir, m., duty.
  dévorer, to devour, swallow up, consume, put up with.
  diadème, m., diadem, crown.
  dicter, to dictate, suggest.
  Dieu, m., God.
  différer, to postpone, delay.
  digne, worthy.
  dire, to say, speak.
  discerner (de), to distinguish (from).
  discorde, f., discord.
  discours, m., speech.
  disgrâce, f., disfavor, downfall.
  disparaître, to disappear.
  disperser, to disperse, scatter.
  disputer, to fight for.
  dissimuler, to disemble, conceal.
  dissiper, to dispel, scatter.
  divin, divine, godsent.
  Divinité, f., divinity, godhead, God.
  diviser, to separate, be aloof.
  dix, ten.
  docile, docile, obedient.
  domestique, m., member of the household, officer.
  don, m., gift.
  donc, then, (_often merely emphatic and not to be translated_).
  donner, to give.
  dont, (_genitive of_ qui,) of which, of whom; with which,
    with whom; by which, by whom.
  douceur, f., mildness, gentleness, favor, sweetness, sweets, joys.
  douleur, f., grief, woes.
  doute, m., doubt; sans --, doubtless.
  dou-x, -ce, sweet, favorable.
  droit, m., right.
  durant, during.
  durée, f., duration.
  dussiez, imp. subj. of devoir; -- -vous, even though you were to.


  E

  eau, f., water.
  éblouir, to dazzle.
  écarté, remote.
  écarter, to remove, dispel, drive away.
  échapper à, to escape.
  éclair, m., lightning.
  éclaircir, to clear up.
  éclairer, to light, shine upon, enlighten.
  éclat, m., brilliancy, lustre, show; montrer avec --,
    to show to all men.
  éclatant, brilliant, striking.
  éclater, to burst, burst forth, be far-reaching;
    faire --, to show forth.
  éclore, to blossom.
  écouter, to listen to, hear.
  écrire, to write.
  écueil, m., rock.
  édit, m., edict, order, decree.
  effacer, to efface.
  effet, m., effect; en --, indeed.
  effort, m., effort, attempt.
  effrayant, terrifying.
  effrayer, to frighten, terrify.
  effroi, m., terror.
  effroyable, awful, terrible.
  égal, equal, the same; à l'-- de, on a par with, equally with.
  égaler, to equal.
  égarer (s'), to stray,
  égorger, to butcher, slay.
  Egypte, f., Egypt.
  élancer (s'), to dart forth.
  élever, to raise, rear.
  éloigner, to remove, far away; s'--, to depart.
  embarras, m. pl; many cares.
  embarrasser, to perplex.
  embraser, to set fire to; s'--, to be kindled.
  embrasser, to embrace, espouse.
  éminent en, eminent for.
  emmener, to lead away.
  empoisonner, to poison, taint.
  emporter, to carry away; l'--, to win the day.
  empreint, imprinted.
  empressé, eager.
  empresser (s'), to be eager to.
  emprunter, to borrow.
  en, of _or_ from him, her, it, them; some; as a; at it;
    on that account.
  en, in.
  encens, m., incense.
  enchaîné, chained, tied.
  enchaînement, m., chain of events.
  enchaîner, to link.
  encor, encore, still.
  endormir (s'), to fall asleep.
  endroit, m., place, spot.
  endurer, to endure, put up with.
  enfance, f., childhood,
  enfant, m. f., child.
  enfanter, to beget.
  enfer, m., enfers, pl., hell.
  enfin, at length, at last, lastly, in short, anyhow.
  enflammer, to inflame.
  enfoncer, to drive deeply.
  ennemi, m., enemy; adj., hostile.
  ennui, m., weariness, trouble,
  ennuyer, to weary; s'-- à, to find no pleasure in.
  entasser, to heap up.
  entendre, to hear; se faire --, to be heard;
    to understand; faire --, to give to understand.
  enti-er, -ère, whole.
  entraîner, to sweep on, away.
  entre, between, among, in, above.
  entrée, f., entrance.
  envelopper, to wrap.
  envenimé, venomous.
  envi; à l'--, vieing with one another.
  envie, f., envy; porter -- à, to envy.
  envier, to envy.
  environner, to surround.
  envisager, to review, consider.
  envoyer, to send, send forth.
  épars, scattered.
  éperdu, bewildered, helpless.
  épier, to spy.
  éploré, weeping.
  épouse, f., wife.
  épouvantable, terrific.
  époux, m., husband.
  épris, enamored.
  éprouver, to feel, put to the test.
  ener, to wander.
  erreur, f., error.
  esclave, m. f., slave,
  espérance, f., hope.
  espérer, to hope, trust,
  espoir, m., hope.
  esprit, m., mind, spirit, angel.
  essaim, m., swarm.
  essuyer, to wipe up, put up with.
  eatimer, to esteem.
  et, and; et . . . et . . ., both . . . and . . .
  état, m., state, condition.
  État, m., state (_province, etc._).
  éteindre, to extinguish.
  étendard, m., standard, banner.
  éternel, eternal, immortal, ever-lasting; l'--, the Almighty.
  étinceler, to sparkle, flash.
  étonner (s'), to be astonished.
  étrange, strange.
  étrang-er, -ere, strange, foreign, unknown; m., stranger.
  être, to be, exist; -- à, to belong to.
  étude, f., study.
  evanouir (s'), to vanish; to faint.
  éveiller, s'--, to wake.
  événement, m., event.
  éviter, to avoid.
  éxces, m., excess; -- d'honneur, passing great honor.
  éxciter, to urge.
  exécrable, execrable, hateful.
  exécuter, to carry out.
  exemple, m., example.
  exercer, to wield.
  exiler, to exile.
  expirer, to expire.
  expliquer, to explain.
  exposer, to expose, reveal; s'--, to risk one's life,
  exprimer, to express, describe.
  exterminer, to exterminate, annihilate.


  F

  faible, weak.
  faiblement, weakly, little.
  faiblesse, f., weakness.
  faire, to make, do; play, take, speak the part of;
    c'est fait de, it is all over with.
  fait, m., fact, deed.
  faîte, m., top, head.
  falloir, to be necessary.
  fameu-x, -se, famous, far-famed.
  famille, f., family.
  farouche, fierce.
  fatal, fatal, fateful.
  fatiguer, to weary.
  fau-x, -sse, false.
  faveur, f., favor; en -- de, on behalf of.
  favorable, favorable, propitious.
  favori, favorite.
  fécond, fruitful.
  feint, feigned, hypocritical.
  félicité, f., great happiness.
  femme, f., woman, wife.
  fer, m., iron, steel, sword; --s, fetters, chains.
  ferme, firm, strong.
  fermer, to close.
  festin, m; feasting, banquet, feast.
  fête, f., feast, festival.
  feu, m., fire.
  fidèle, faithful, constant.
  fi-er, -ère, proud.
  fièrement, proudly.
  figurer, to figure, represent.
  fil, m., thread.
  fille, f., girl, daughter.
  fils, m., son.
  fin, f., end; à la --, at last.
  flambeau, m., torch.
  flatter, to flatter, gratify.
  flèche, f., arrow.
  fléchir, to bend.
  florissant, flourishing, thriving.
  flotter, to float, waver.
  foi, f., faith, promise, word, truth, loyalty, faithfulness.
  fois, f., (_repeated_) time; e.g. deux --, twice;
    cent --, a hundred times; à la --, at the same time.
  fond, m., back, depths.
  fonder, to base, found, build; fondé sur, strong in,
    (_e.g. based upon_).
  forcer, to force, compel.
  former, to form, make, contrive, train.
  fort, m., fort, fortress.
  fou, folle, mad, senseless.
  foudre, f., thunder (bolt).
  foudroyer, to strike down (_as by a thunderbolt_).
  foule, f., crowd.
  fouler, to trample.
  fragile, frail; roseau --, broken reed.
  frapper, to strike.
  fraude, f., deception.
  frayeur, f., fear.
  frémir, to shudder, tremble.
  frémissement, m., thrill, shudder.
  frère, m., brother, dear friend.
  frissonner, to shudder.
  frivole, frivolous.
  front, m., forehead, brow.
  frontière, f., frontier.
  fugiti-f, -ve, fleeing, fleeting.
  fuir, to fly from, shun.
  fuite, f., flight.
  funèbre, funereal, black, dark.
  funeste, baneful.
  fureur, f., fury; en --, furious, raging.
  furieu-x, -se, furious, ravening.


  G

  gage, m., pledge, token, mark.
  gagner, to win.
  garde, m., guard.
  garder, to keep, observe,
  gémir, to moan, groan.
  gémissement, m., moan, groan.
  généreu-x, -se, generous, lofty.
  genou, m., knee; à --x, on (their) knees.
  glacer, to chill; se --, to freeze.
  glaive, m., sword.
  gloire, f., glory.
  glorieu-x, -se, glorious.
  glorifier, to glorify.
  goût, m., taste; avoir -- à, to have a taste for.
  goûter, to taste, enjoy.
  gouverner, to govern, rule, wield.
  grâce, f., grace, graciousness, charm, attraction, favor;
    trouver --, to find favor.
  grand, great, big, large.
  grand, m., grandee, noble.
  grandeur, f., greatness, grandeur.
  graver, to engrave,
  gré; à son --, at will.
  grossir, to swell.
  guerre, f., war.
  guider, to guide, lead,


  H

  habillements, m. pl., garments.
  habiller, to dress.
  habit, m., coat; fl., clothes, raiment.
  habiter, to dwell, inhabit.
  haine, f., hatred.
  haïr, to hate, loathe.
  hardi, bold, audacious.
  harmonic, f., harmony.
  hasarder, to risk.
  haut, high, loud; du -- de, from the height of.
  hé, why!  what!  hé --?  what?
  Hébreu, m., Hebrew, Jew.
  hélas! alas!
  Hellespont, Hellespont (_the modern Dardanelles_).
  heraut, m., herald.
  herbe, f., grass.
  hérésie, f., heresy, false religious doctrine.
  héritage, m., inheritance.
  héritier, m., heir.
  héros, m., hero.
  heure, f., hour; les --s, time.
  heureu-x, -se, happy, successful.
  histoire, f., story.
  holà!  here!
  homicide, homicidal, murderous.
  hommage, m., homage.
  homme, m., man,
  honneur, m., honor.
  honorer, to honor.
  honte, f., shame.
  honteux, shameful.
  horreur, f., horror, awe, horrible thing, horrible thought.
  humain, human; les --s, mankind.
  humilier, to humble.


  I

  ici, here,
  idée, f., thought, mind.
  idole, f., idol.
  Idumée, f., Idumaea.
  ignominie, f., ignominy, shame.
  ignorer, not to know.
  illustre, illustrious.
  image, f., image, vision.
  immobile, immovable.
  immoler, to sacrifice.
  immortel, -le, immortal.
  impie, impious.
  impiété, f., impiety, the impious.
  impitoyable, pitiless.
  implacable, implacable, unappeasable.
  implorer, to implore, beseech.
  important, important, weighty.
  importer, to be of importance; il n'importe, no matter.
  imposteur, m., impostor.
  impuissant, powerless, impotent.
  impur, unclean, foul.
  imputer, to ascribe.
  inanimé, inanimate, lifeless.
  inconnu, unknown.
  inconstance, f., inconstancy, restlessness, fickleness.
  Inde, Indus (river).
  Indien, m., Indian.
  indigne, unworthy, shameful.
  indompté, wild, untamed, indomitable.
  inévitable, unavoidable.
  inexorable, inexorable, unmovable.
  infecter, to pollute.
  infidèle, faithless, infidel, heretic.
  inflexible, inflexible, unbending.
  infortuné, unhappy, unfortunate.
  ingénieux, ingenious, skilful.
  ingrat, ungrateful.
  injure, f., wrong, insult, injury.
  innocent, innocent, pure.
  innombrable, innumerable.
  inouï, unheard of.
  inqui-et, -ète, anxious.
  inquiéter, to make anxious.
  inquiétude, f., anxiety.
  insensé, senseless, foolish.
  insipide, insipid, tasteless; devenir --, to pall upon.
  insolent, m., insolent man.
  inspirer, to inspire.
  instrument, m., instrument, means, musical instrument,
  insulter, to insult; -- à, to mock.
  interdit, confused, perplexed.
  intéressé, self-seeking.
  intéresser, to cause to be interested.
  intérêt, w., interest, self-interest, greed;
    claim, prize, need, cause.
  intérieur, inner; palais --, private apartments of a palace.
  interroger, to examine, 'search the heart of'.
  interrompre, to interrupt.
  intestine, civil.
  introduire, to introduce, show.
  inutile, useless.
  invariable, unchanging.
  inventer, to invent.
  irrité, angry, angered.
  irriter, to anger.
  Israelite, m. f., Israelite, Jew, Jewess; adj. Jewish.
  issu, sprung.
  ivre, drunk.


  J

  jadis, formerly, long ago.
  jalousie, f., jealousy.
  jaloux, jealous.
  jamais, ever; ne . . . --, never.
  jardin, m., garden.
  jeter, to throw, cast.
  jeu, m., game, sport.
  jeune, young.
  jeûne, m., fast, fasting.
  joie, f., joy.
  jouet, m., toy, plaything, sport.
  joug, m., yoke.
  jouir de, to enjoy.
  jour, m., day, light; voir le --, to be born;
    mettre au --, to give birth to; --s, life.
  Jourdain, m., Jordan (river).
  journée, f., day, date.
  juger, to judge.
  Jui-f, -ve, Jew, Jewess.
  jurer, to swear.
  jusqu'à, jusques à, as far as, even to.
  juste, just, merciful; m., just man.
  justement, justly.


  L

  là, there; de --, hence.
  laisser, to allow, leave.
  lambeau, m., rag, tatter.
  langage, m., language.
  langue, f., tongue.
  larme, f., tear.
  las, -se, tired, weary.
  lasser, to weary, pall upon; se --, to tire, grow weary.
  lég-er, -ère, light.
  léopard, m., leopard,
  leur, their; to them, them.
  lever, to lift, raise; se --, to arise.
  libation, f., libation (_offering of wine, etc_.).
  libre, free.
  lier, to tie, bind,
  lieu, m., place, spot.
  ligue, f., league, banded forces.
  lire, to read.
  lit, m., bed.
  livre, m., book.
  livrer, to deliver up.
  loi, f., law.
  loin, far.
  long, -ue, long, slow.
  longtemps, long.
  lorsque, when.
  louange, f., praise.
  loup, m., wolf.
  lui, he, him; to him, to her; -- -meme, himself, the same.
  luire, to shine; faire --, to flash.
  lumière, f., light.


  M

  magnanime, magnanimous.
  magnifique, magnificent, splendid, noble.
  main, f., hand.
  maintenant, now, at present.
  mais, but.
  maître, m., master.
  maîtresse, f., mistress, queen.
  majesté, f., majesty.
  mal, m., hurt, offence.
  mal, badly, ill.
  malédiction, f., malediction, curses.
  malgré, in spite of.
  malheur, m., misfortune, woe.
  malheureu-x, -se, unfortunate, unhappy; m., wretch,
    wretched being.
  malice, f., wickedness; --s, 'slings and arrows' (_of fortune_).
  manquer, to be lacking.
  marbre, m., marble.
  marcher, to walk, go.
  Mardochée, Mordecai.
  marque, f., mark, token.
  marquer, to mark, fix, set.
  matin, m., morning.
  maudire, to curse.
  méchant, wicked.
  mêler, to mingle, mix; se -- à, to mingle with.
  membre, m., limb.
  même, even; adj., same, very, self; un --, one and the same.
  mêmoire, f., memory.
  menacer, to menace, threaten.
  mener, to lead.
  mensonge, m., untruth.
  mensong-er, -ère, lying.
  menteu-r, -se, lying.
  mépriser, to scorn, spurn.
  mer, f., sea.
  merci, f, mercy.
  mérite, m., merit, deserts.
  mériter, to deserve.
  merveille, f., marvel, wonder.
  mesurer, to measure.
  mets, m., meat, dish.
  mettre, to put, place.
  meurtre, m., murder.
  mieux, better, the better; le, la --, the best.
  milieu, m., middle.
  mille, a thousand.
  ministre, m., steward, minister.
  misérable, wretched.
  modèle, m., model, example.
  moi, I, me; -- -même, myself.
  moindre, less; le, la --, the least;
    vos -- . . . , your least . . .
  moins, -- de, less; au --, at the least, so much as;
    du --, at least, at any rate;
    d'autant --, so much the less.
  mois, m., month.
  moitié, f., half; à --, half.
  mollesse, f., softness, luxury.
  mon, ma, mes, my.
  monarque, m., monarch.
  monde, m., world.
  mont, m., mount, mountain, hill.
  montagne, f., hill,
  monter, to rise.
  montrer, to show.
  monument, m., monument; reminder, record.
  mort, f., death.
  mortel, -le, mortal, m., les --s, mankind.
  mot, m., word.
  mourir, se --, to die.
  muet, -te, dumb.
  mur, m., wall.
  mystère, m., mystery.


  N

  nager, to swim.
  naissance, f., birth.
  naissant, young, growing, (_lit_. just being born).
  naître, to be born.
  ne . . . pas, point, not; -- de, no.
  ne . . . plus, no longer, no more.
  ne . . . que, only.
  néant, m., nothingness; comme un --, as if it were nothing.
  neveux, m. pl., posterity.
  ni . . . ni, neither . . . nor.
  noces, f. pl., nuptials.
  noeud, m., knot, tie, bond.
  noir, black.
  nom, m., name.
  nombreux, numerous.
  nommer, to name; se --, to be called, be named.
  notre, pl., nos, our.
  nourrir, to feed, nourish, cherish.
  nouveau, nouvel, nouvelle, new.
  noyer, to drown.
  nuage, cloud.
  nuit, f., night.
  nul, -le, no.


  O

  obéir à, to obey, comply with.
  obeissance, f., obedience.
  objet, m., object.
  obscur, obscure, mysterious.
  obscurcir, to darken.
  obscurité, f., obscurity.
  observer, to observe, notice.
  obtenir, to obtain, win.
  occuper, to occupy, fill.
  odeur, f., smell, fragrance.
  odieu-x, -se, hateful.
  oeil, m., eye.
  oeuvre, f., work.
  offense, f., offence, offence given, sin.
  offensé, hurt, wounded.
  officier, m., officer.
  offrir, to offer.
  ombre, f., shadow, darkness.
  on, one, a man, people, you, they.
  oncle, m., uncle.
  opposer, to oppose.
  oppresseur, m., oppressor.
  opprobre, m., shame, Bcum.
  opulence, f., wealth.
  or, m., gold.
  orage, m., storm.
  orageu-x, -se, stormy.
  ordonner, to command, order, prepare.
  ordre, m., order, summons.
  oreille, f., ear.
  orgueil, m., pride.
  orgueilleux, proud.
  ornement, m., ornament, adornment.
  orner, to adorn.
  orphelin, m., orphan.
  oser, to dare.
  ou, or; -- . . . --, either . . . or.
  où, where, when, in which; d'--, whence.
  oubli, m., forgetfulness.
  oublier, to forget, se faire --, to be forgotten
    (_lit_. make people forget one).
  outrager, to outrage, oppress.
  ouvrage, m., work, handiwork.


  P

  pacifique, peaceful, favorable.
  paille, f., straw; -- légère, chaff.
  paisible, peaceful.
  paix, f., peace.
  palais, m., palace.
  pâle, pale.
  pâleur, f., pallor, whiteness.
  pâlir, to turn pale.
  par, by.
  paraître, to appear.
  pareil, similar, like; -- à, like unto.
  parer, to adorn, deck.
  parfait, perfect.
  parler, to speak.
  parmi, among, in the ranks of.
  parole, f., word.
  parricide, parricidal.
  part, f., share, side; de toutes --s, on all sides.
  partage, m., lot.
  partager, to share, diffuse, distribute.
  Parthe, m., Parthian.
  partie, f., part; in part.
  partir, to depart, go; -- de, to come from.
  partout, everywhere.
  pas, m., step.
  pas; ne . . . --, not; ne . . . -- de, no.
  passage, m., way, channel.
  passag-er, -ère, temporary, fleeting.
  passé, m., past.
  passer, to pass over, by; se --, to go on, take place.
  patrie, f., country,
  pâture, f., pasture, food.
  pavé, m., pavement, stone floor.
  payer, to pay for.
  pays, m., country, land.
  pécher, to sin.
  peindre, to paint, depict.
  peine, f., distress, penalty; à --, hardly.
  pencher, to sway, lean.
  pendant, during; -- que, while.
  pénétrer, to penetrate; pénétré de, thrilled with.
  pensée, f., thought.
  penser, to think; -- à, to think of.  Que penses-tu?
    What is thy suggestion?
  percer, to pierce.
  perdre, to lose, destroy.
  père, m., father.
  perfide, perfidious, treacherous.
  perfidie, f., treachery.
  péril, m., peril, danger.
  périr, to perish.
  permettre, to permit, suffer, allow.
  Persan, Persian.
  Perse, f., Persia.
  persécuteur, m., persecutor.
  personnage, m., character (in a play); --s, dramatis personae.
  perte, f., loss, destruction.
  peu, little.
  peuple, m., nation, people, host.
  peupler, to people.
  peut-être, may be, perhaps.
  pied, m., foot.
  piège, m., snare.
  pierre, f., stone.
  piété, f., Piety, Love of God.
  pitié, f., pity.
  place, f., place, room, square.
  placer, to place, set.
  plaindre, to pity; se --, to complain.
  plainte, f., complaint.
  plaire (à), to please; se -- (à), to enjoy.
  plaisir, m., pleasure.
  plein, full.
  pleurer, to weep, weep over.
  pleurs, m. pl., tears.
  plier, to bend.
  plonger, to steep.
  ployer, to bend.
  plus, more: -- de, more than; le, la, les --, most, the most.
  plusieurs, several.
  plutôt, rather.
  poids, m., weight.
  point, m., point; sur le -- que, just when; de -- en --,
    in every particular; ne . . . --, not; ne . . . -- de, no.
  pompe, f., pomp.
  pompeusement, magnificently.
  pompeu-x, -se, pompous, splendid.
  porte, f., door, gate.
  porter, to carry, bear.
  portique, m., porch.
  poser, to place, set.
  posséder, to possess, have, enjoy.
  possesseur, m., owner.
  postérité, f.; posterity, descendants.
  poudre, f., dust.
  pour, for, to, in order to, in favor _or_ defence of.
  pourpre, f., purple.
  pourquoi, why?
  poursuivre, to pursue.
  pousser, to impel.
  poussière, f., dust.
  pouvoir, m., power.
  pouvoir, to be able; se --, to be possible.
  pratiques, f. pl., plottings.
  précieu-x, -se, precious.
  prédestiné, predestined.
  préférer, to prefer.
  premi-er, -ère, first, former.
  prendre, to take; -- un jour, to set a date.
  préparer, to prepare.
  près de, near to, in comparison with.
  présage, m., presage, omen.
  présence, f., presence.
  présent, m., present, gift; present (_time_).
  présenter, to present, offer; se --, to appear.
  pressant, pressing, imminent.
  presser, to be pressing, oppress.
  prétendre, to mean.
  prêter, to lend.
  prêtre, m., priest.
  prévenir, to warn, notify; forestall; anticipate, bias.
  prier, to pray.
  prière, f., prayer.
  privé de, deprived of, without.
  prix, m., price, prize, reward, penalty.
  prochain, adjoining.
  prodiguer, to lavish.
  profanation, f., profanation, desecration.
  profane, profane, unworthy; m., intruder.
  profiter, to take advantage.
  profond, deep, bottomless.
  proie, f., prey; en -- à, a prey to.
  projet, m., project, plan, scheme.
  promettre, to promise.
  prompt, quick, prompt, ready; -- à, eager to.
  promptement, promptly.
  prononcer, to decide.
  prophète, m., prophet.
  proposer, to propose, offer.
  propre, own.
  proscrit, proscribed, condemned.
  prospérer, to prosper, thrive.
  prospérité, f., prosperity.
  prosterné, bowed, prostrate.
  prosterner (se),to bow, bend the knee.
  protéger, to protect.
  prudence, f., prudence, tact.
  publi-c, -que, public.
  publier, to make known.
  pudeur, f., modesty, shame.
  puis, then.
  puiser, to draw (_as from a well_).
  puisque, since.
  puissance, f., power, might.
  puissant, powerful, mighty.
  puisse, puissent, (_subj. pres. of_ pouvoir) may . . .!
  punir, to punish.
  pur, pure, genuine.
  purifier, to purify, cleanse.


  Q

  quand, when.
  que, whom, which, that; let . . .!  what?  why?
    How! -- de!  What a number of!
  quel, -le, what?  which?  what!  what a!
  quel que, whoever.
  quelque, whatever, some.
  quelqu'un, one, someone.
  querelle, f., quarrel, cause; pour ta --, on your behalf.
  qui, who, which, that.
  quiconque, whoever, whose.
  quitter, to leave, forsake, take off.
  quoi? hé --! What!


  R

  rage, f., rage, fury.
  rallumer, to rekindle.
  rang, m., rank, high position; mettre au -- de, to consider, deem.
  ranger, to draw up; se --, to gather.
  rassembler, to gather together.
  rassurer, to reassure, calm the fears of.
  ravir, to ravish, take (the life), rob; -- à, to take from.
  ravisseur, m., ravisher, destroyer.
  rebâtir, to rebuild.
  rebut, m., scum,
  recevoir, to receive.
  récit, m., tale, story.
  récompense, f., reward.
  récompenser, to reward.
  reconnaissance, f., gratitude,
  reconnaître, to recognize, acknowledge, reward.
  reculé, distant.
  redire, to repeat.
  redoubtable, redoutable.
  redouter, to dread.
  rêduire, to reduce, bring.
  refuser, to refuse.
  regagner, to seek again, go back to.
  regard, m., look.
  regarder, to look at, see.
  régler, to rule, se -- sur, to be guided by.
  règne, m., reign.
  régner, to reign, be king or queen.
  regorger, to flow up.
  reine, f., queen.
  rejeter, to reject.
  rejoindre, to join.
  réjouir, to rejoice.
  relever, to raise again.
  remords, m., remorse.
  rempart, m., rampart.
  remplir, to fill.
  remporter, to carry off, win.
  renaître, to be born again.
  rendre, to give back, pay (_hommage_); make; se --, to go, attend.
  renfermer, to enclose, contain.
  rentrer, to return.
  renverser, to overthrow.
  repaire, m., den.
  repaître, to glut.
  répandre, to pour, shed, scatter, se --, to spread.
  réparer, to repair, atone for.
  repasser, to cross back over.
  repentir, m., repentance.
  répondre, to answer.
  réponse, f., answer, reply.
  repos, m., rest, peace.
  reposer, to rest; se--sur, to trust to.
  reprendre, to resume.
  représenter, to represent.
  reproche, m., reproach.
  reprocher, to reproach.
  répudier, to repudiate.
  réserver, to reserve, keep.
  respirer, to breathe.
  ressentir, to feel, be sensible to.
  resserrer (se), to be wrung.
  ressort, m., spring.
  reste, m., rest, remainder, remains; du --, moreover.
  rester, to remain.
  retenir, to detain, keep.
  retentir de, to echo with.
  retirer, to draw; se --, to withdraw.
  retour, m., return.
  retracer, to retrace, rehearse, tell.
  retrancher, to cut off.
  révéler, to reveal.
  revenir, to come back; -- à soi, to come back to life.
  révérer, to revere, worship.
  revêtir, to clothe.
  revêtu, clothed, clad.
  revivre, to live again.
  revoir, to see again, review, revisit.
  révoquer, to revoke, cancel.
  Rhin, Rhine (_river_).
  riant, laughing.
  riche, rich.
  richesse, f., wealth, riches.
  rigueur, f., severity.
  risée, laughter, mockery.
  rivales, f. pl., rival queens.
  rive, f., bank.
  robe, f., robe, dress, gown.
  roi, m., king.
  rompre, to break.
  roseau, m., reed.
  rougeur, m., redness, flush.
  route, f., road, path.
  rudesse, f., hardness.
  rugir, to roar.
  ruisseau, m., stream.


  S

  sacré, sacred, holy.
  sage, wise.
  sagesse, f., wisdom.
  saint, holy, pious; m., saint.
  sais, _indic. of_ savoir; un je ne -- quel trouble,
    a nameless fear (_lit. an I-know-not-what agitation).
  saisissement, m., fright, terror.
  salaire, m., reward.
  salon, m., drawing-room, hall.
  salut, m., safety, welfare.
  salutaire, helpful, saving.
  sanctifier, to sanctify.
  sang, m., blood, race.
  sanglant, bloodthirsty.
  sanglot, m., sob.
  sanguinaire, bloodthirsty.
  sans, without, but for.
  sauvage, savage, wild.
  sauver, to save, save life.
  savant, learned.
  savoir, to know, know how to, succeed in.
  sceau, m., seal.
  scène, f., scene.
  sceptre, m., scepter.
  Scythe, m., Scythian.
  second, second, other,
  seconder, to second, support, back.
  secourir, to succour, rescue.
  secours, m., succour, help, aid.
  secr-et, -ète, secret.
  seditieux, seditious, mutinous.
  seigneur, m., Lord.
  sein, m., bosom, depths.
  sejour, m., abode, dwelling-place.
  sembler, to seem.
  semence, f; seed.
  semer, to sow.
  sentiment, m., feeling, opinion, view.
  sentir, to feel.
  séparé, apart, removed.
  séparer, to separate.
  sépulture, f., burial.
  serein, serene, cloudless, mild, favorable.
  service, m., service (_rendered_).
  servile, slavish.
  servir, to be a slave, serve, be of use; -- de,
    to serve as a, be a; que sert? what is the use?
  servitude, f; slavery.
  seul, alone.
  seulement, only, just.
  sévère, severe, stem.
  sexe, m., sex,
  si, so, if, whether,
  siècle, m., century, age.
  signaler, to memorize, make famous.
  signer, to sign.
  simple, simple, mere; --s enfants, little children.
  sincère, sincere, faithful.
  Sion, Zion.
  sitôt, so soon, so quickly.
  soeur, f., sister.
  soin, m., care, pains; --s, attentions; avoir -- de,
    to be sure to.
  soleil, m., sun.
  solennel, solemn.
  solennité, f., solemn feast.
  solitaire, solitary, in solitude.
  sombre, dark, gloomy.
  sommeil, m., sleep.
  sommeiller, to sleep.
  son, m., sound.
  son, sa, ses, his, her, its.
  songe, m., dream.
  songer à, to think of.
  sort, m., fate.
  sortir, to go out, come (_on the stage_).
  soudain, sudden, suddenly.
  souffle, m., breath.
  souffler, to blow, breathe.
  souffrir, to suffer, allow.
  souhaiter, to wish.
  soulager, to relieve, lighten,
  soumis, (_past part. of_ soumettre), submissive, obedient.
  soupçonner, to suspect.
  soupir, m., sigh.
  soupirer, to sigh, sigh over, deplore.
  sourd, deaf.
  sous, under, beneath.
  soutenir, to hold up, support, maintain; withstand, stand.
  soutien, m., support, supporter.
  souvenir (se), to remember.
  souvent, often.
  souverain, sovereign.
  spectacle, m., show, spectacle, display.
  splendent, f., splendor.
  subtil, subtle, keen; trop --, over-nice, over-ingenious,
  succès, m., success, result.
  suffire, to suffice, be enough.
  suffrage, m., claim to preference.
  suite, f., escort; de la -- de, in attendance upon,
    in waiting upon.
  suivre, to follow, attend.
  sujet, m., subject, cause.
  superbe, haughty, magnificent.
  superflu, superfluous, idle.
  supplice, m., punishment, penalty.
  suprême, supreme.
  sur, on, upon, over.
  surprendre, to take by surprise, unawares.
  surtout, above all, especially.
  Suse, Susa, (_in the Bible_: Shushan the palace).
  suspendre, to keep in suspense, delay, interrupt.


  T

  taire (se), to keep silence, be silent; faire --, to silence.
  tandis que, while, so long as.
  tant, so much; -- de, so much, so many.
  tard, late.
  tarder, to delay.
  teint, m., complexion, cheeks.
  tel, such; -- que, such as.
  témoin, m., witness.
  tempête, f., tempest, storm.
  temps, m., time; en même --, at the same time.
  tendre, to aim; stretch, extend, hold out.
  tendre, tender, loving.
  tendresse, f., affection, love.
  ténèbres, f. pl., darkness.
  tenir, to hold, keep; -- lieu de, to fill the place of.
  terminer, to put an end to.
  terre, f., earth.
  terreur, f., terror.
  terrible, terrible, dreadful, frightful.
  tête, f., head.
  théâtre, m., theater, stage.
  tigre, m., tiger.
  timide, timid.
  tirer, to draw.
  toi, thou, thee.
  tombeau, m., tomb, grave.
  tomber, to fall.
  ton, ta, tes, thy.
  tonnerre, m., thunder.
  tôt, soon.
  toucher, to touch, move.
  toujours, always, ever, still.
  tour, m., turn, round.
  tour, f., tower.
  tourment, m., torture.
  tourmenter, to torment.
  tourner, to turn.
  tous, pl., all.
  tout, all, whole; everything; only, quite.
  toutefois, however.
  tracer, to trace, write, enter.
  trahir, to betray.
  traîner, to drag.
  trait, m., shaft, arrow,
  traiter, to treat; -- de, to consider as, call.
  traître, m., traitor.
  trame, f., plot.
  tranquille, tranquil, calm.
  transplanter, to transplant.
  transport, m., rage, temper.
  trembler, to tremble.
  trépas, m., death.
  trésor, m., treasure, treasury.
  tribu, f., tribe.
  triomphe, m., triumph, achievement.
  triste, sad.
  tristesse, f., sadness.
  trois, three.
  troisième, third.
  tromper, to deceive, disappoint; se --, to be in error.
  trompeu-r, -se, deceitful, deceptive, treacherous.
  tronc, m., (_tree_) trunk.
  trône, m., throne.
  trop, too, too much, over.
  trouble, m., agitation.
  troubler, to disturb.
  troupe, f., band.
  troupeau, m., flock, herd.
  trouver, to find; se --, to be found.
  tumulte, m., tumult, bustle, 'madding crowd.'
  tumultueux, tumultuous, multitudinous.
  tyrannie, f., tyranny.


  U

  un, a, one.
  unir (s'), to unite.
  univers, m., universe, the whole universe.
  usage, m., use, custom, precedent.
  usure, f., usury, usurious interest; payer avec --,
    to pay heavily for.


  V

  vain, vain, idle, empty, unreal; en --, in vain;
    --ement, uselessly.
  vaincre, to conquer.
  vainqueur, m., conqueror, victor.
  valeur, f., valor.
  vallee, f., valley, vale.
  valoir, to be worth; faire --, to show off, make the most of.
  vanter, to boast, claim.
  vapeur, f., vapor, mirkiness.
  vaste, vast.
  vautour, m., vulture.
  veiller, to watch.
  veine, f., vein.
  vengeance, f., vengeance, punishment, revenge.
  venger, to avenge.
  vengeur, avenging; m., avenger.
  venir, to come; -- de, to have just.
  vent, m., wind.
  vérité, f., truth.
  vers, towards.
  verser, to pour.
  vertu, f; virtue, power.
  vertueux, virtuous.
  vêtements, m. pl., raiment.
  veuve, f; widow.
  victime, f., victim.
  victoire, f., victory.
  victorieu-x, -se, victorious.
  vie, f., life.
  vieillard, m., old man,
  vil, vile, helpless.
  violer, to violate, break.
  visage, m., face.
  vivre, to live.
  voeu, m., vow, prayer, desire.
  voici, here is; me --, here I am.
  voilà, there is!  that is.
  voile, m., veil, screen, curtain.
  voir, to see.
  voix, f., voice.
  voler, to fly.
  volonté, f., will.
  votre, pl. vos, your.
  vôtre; le, la --, yours.
  vouloir, to wish, try, need, require; -- bien, to deign,
    condescend.
  vrai, true.
  vue, f., sight.


  Y

  y, there, in it, to it.
  yeux, pl. of oeil, m., eyes, à tes --, in thy sight.


  Z

  zèle, m., zeal.
  zélé, zealous.











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Esther, by Jean Racine

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ESTHER ***

***** This file should be named 15790-8.txt or 15790-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/5/7/9/15790/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

