The Project Gutenberg EBook of Han Gong Qiu, by Zhiyuan Ma

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Han Gong Qiu

Author: Zhiyuan Ma

Release Date: May 31, 2016 [EBook #52199]

Language: Chinese

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HAN GONG QIU ***




Produced by Hsin-Ju Lan






Title: 漢宮秋 (Han Gong Qiu)
Author: Zhiyuan Ma


漢宮秋 (Han Gong Qiu)

楔子
(沖末扮番王引部落上，詩云)氈帳秋風迷宿草，穹廬夜月聽悲笳。控弦百萬爲君長，
款塞稱藩屬漢家。某乃呼韓耶單於是也。若論俺家世，久居朔漠，獨霸北方，
以射獵爲生，攻伐爲事。大王曾避俺東徙，魏絳曾怕俺講和。獯鬻犭嚴狁，
逐代易名：單於可汗，隨時稱號。當秦漢交兵之時，中原有事，俺國強盛，有控弦甲士百萬。
俺祖公冒頓單於，圍漢高帝於白登七日，用婁敬之謀，兩國講和，以公主嫁俺國中。
至惠帝、呂後以來，每代必循故事，以宗女歸俺番家。宣帝之世，我眾兄弟爭立不定，
國勢稍弱。今眾部落立我爲呼韓耶單於，實是漢朝外甥。我有甲士十萬，南移近塞，
稱藩漢室。昨曾遣使進貢，欲請公主，未知漢帝肯尋盟約否？今日天高氣爽，眾頭目每，
向沙堤射獵一番，多少是好！正是：番家無產業，弓矢是生涯。(下)(淨扮毛延壽上，
詩云)爲人雕心雁爪，做事欺大壓小。全憑諂佞奸貪，一生受用不了。某非别人，
毛延壽的便是。現在漢朝駕下，爲中大夫之職。因我百般巧詐，一味諂諛，
哄的皇帝老頭兒十分歡喜，言聽計從。朝里朝外，那一個不怕我，那一個不敬我？
我又學的一個法兒，隻是教皇帝少見儒臣，多昵女色，我這寵幸才得牢固。
道尤末了，聖駕早上。(正末扮漢元帝引内官、宮女上，詩云)嗣傳十葉繼炎劉，
獨掌乾坤四百州。邊塞久盟和議策，從今高枕已無憂。某漢元帝是也。俺祖高皇帝，
奮布衣，起豐沛，滅秦屠項，掙下這等基業。傳到朕躬，已是十代。自朕嗣位以來，
四海晏然，八方寧靜。非朕躬有德，皆賴眾文武扶持。自先帝晏駕之後，宮女盡放出宮去了。
今後宮寂寞，如何是好！(毛延壽云)陛下，田舍翁多收十斛麥，尚欲易婦，況陛下貴爲天子，
富有四海。合無遣官遍行天下，選擇室女。不分王侯宰相、軍民人家，但要十五以上，
二十以下者，容貌端正，盡選將來，以充後宮，有何不可？(駕云)卿說的是。
就加卿爲選擇使，齎領詔書一通，遍行天下刷選。將選中者各圖形一軸送來，朕按圖臨幸。
待卿成功回時，别有區處。(唱)

【仙呂】【賞花時】四海平安絕士馬，五穀豐登沒戰伐，寡人待刷室女選宮娃。
你避不的馳驅困乏，看那一個合屬俺帝王家。(下)

第一折
(毛延壽上，詩云)大塊黄金任意撾，血海王條全不怕。生前隻要有錢財，死後那管人唾罵。
某，毛延壽，領着大漢皇帝聖旨，遍行天下，刷選室女，已選夠九十九名；
各家盡肯饋送，所得金銀卻也不少。昨日來到成都秭歸縣，選得一人，乃是王長者之女，
名喚王嬙，字昭君。生得光彩射人，十分豔麗，真乃天下絕色。爭奈他本是莊農人家，
無大錢財。我問他要百兩黄金，選爲第一。他一則說家道貧窮，二則倚着他容貌出眾，
全然不肯。我本待退了他。(做忖科，云)不要，倒好了他！眉頭一縱，計上心來。
只把美人圖點上些破綻，到京師必定發入冷宮，教他受苦一世。正是：恨小非君子，
無毒不丈夫。(下)(正旦扮王嬙引二宮女上，詩云)一日承宣入上陽，十年未得見君王；
良宵寂寂誰來伴，唯有琵琶引興長。妾身王嬙，小字昭君，成都秭歸人也。父親王長者，
平生務農爲業。母親生妾時，夢月入懷，複墜於地，後來生下妾身。年長一十八歲，
蒙恩選充後宮。不想使臣毛延壽問妾身索要金銀，不曾與他，將妾影圖點破，不曾得見君王，
現今退居永巷。妾身在家頗通絲竹，彈得幾曲琵琶。當此夜深孤悶之時，我試理一曲消遣咱。
(做彈科)(駕引内官提燈上，雲)某漢元帝。自從刷選室女入宮，多有不曾寵幸，煞是怨望咱。
今日萬機稍暇，不免尋宮走一遭，看那個有緣的，得遇朕躬也呵。(唱)

【仙呂】【點絳唇】車碾殘花，玉人月下吹簫罷。未遇宮娃，是幾度添白發。

【混江龍】料必他珠簾不掛，望昭陽一步一天涯。疑了些無風竹影，恨了些有月窗紗。
他每見弦管聲中尋玉輦，恰便似鬥牛星畔盼浮槎。(旦做彈科)(駕云)是那里彈的琵琶響？
(内官云)是。(正末唱)是誰人偷彈一曲，寫出嗟呀？(内官云)快報去接駕。(駕云)不要。
(唱)莫便要忙傳聖旨，報與他家。我則怕乍蒙恩把不定心兒怕，驚起宮槐宿鳥，庭樹棲鴉。
(云)小黄門，你看是那一宮的宮女彈琵琶，傳旨去教他來接駕，不要驚唬着他。(内官報科，
云)兀那彈琵琶的，是那位娘娘？聖駕到來，急忙迎接者！(旦趨接科)(駕唱)

【油葫蘆】恕無罪，吾當親問咱，這里屬那位下？休怪我不曾來往乍行踏。我特來填還你這
淚揾濕鮫魚肖帕，溫和你露冷透凌波襪。天生下這豔姿，合是我寵幸他。今宵畫燭銀台下，
剝地管喜信爆燈花。(云)小黄門，你看那紗籠内燭光越亮了，你與我挑起來看咱。(唱)

【天下樂】和他也弄着精神射絳紗。卿家，你覷咱，則他那瘦岩岩影兒可喜殺。
(旦云)妾身早知陛下駕臨，隻合迎接，接駕不早，妾該萬死。(駕唱)迎頭兒稱妾身，
滿口兒呼陛下，必不是尋常百姓家。(云)看了他容貌端正，是好女子也呵！(唱)

【醉中天】將兩葉賽宮樣眉兒畫，把一個宜梳裹臉兒搽；額角香鈿貼翠花，一笑有傾城價。
若是越勾踐姑蘇台上見他，那西施半籌也不納，更敢早十年敗國亡家。

(云)你這等模樣出眾，誰家女子？(旦云)妾姓王名嬙，字昭君，成都秭歸縣人。父親王長者。
祖父以來務農爲業，閭閻百姓，不知帝王家禮度。(駕唱)

【金盞兒】我看你眉掃黛，鬢堆鴉，腰弄柳，臉舒霞。那昭陽到處難安插，誰問你一梨兩壩
做生涯？也是你君恩留枕簟，天教雨露潤桑麻。既不沙俺江山千萬里，直尋到茅舍兩三家。

(云)看卿這等體態，如何不得近幸？(旦云)妾父王長者，止生妾身，當初選時，使臣毛延壽
索要金銀，妾家貧寒無湊，故將妾眼下點成破綻，因此發入冷宮。(駕云)小黄門，你取那
影圖來看，(黄門取圖看科)(駕唱)

【醉扶歸】我則問那待詔别無話，卻怎麼這顏色不加搽？點得這一寸秋波玉有暇。端的是卿眇目，
他雙瞎？便宣的八百姻嬌比並他，也未必強如俺娘娘帶破賺丹青畫。

(云)小黄門，傳旨說與金吾衛，便拿毛延壽斬首報來。(旦云)陛下，妾父母在成都見隸民籍，
望陛下恩典寬免，量與些恩榮咱。(駕云)這個容易。(唱)

【金盞兒】你便晨挑菜，夜看瓜，春種穀，夏澆麻。情取棘針門粉壁上除了差法，你向正陽門
改嫁的倒榮華。俺官職頗高如村社長，這宅院剛大似縣官衙。謝天地可憐窮女婿，再誰敢欺負
俺丈人家！(雲)近前來，聽寡人旨，封你做明妃者。(旦雲)量妾身怎生消受的陛下恩寵！
(做謝恩科)(駕唱)

【賺煞】且盡此宵情，休問明朝話。(旦云)陛下明朝早早駕臨，妾這里侯駕。(駕唱)到明日，
多管是醉臥在昭陽禦榻。(旦云)妾身賤微，雖蒙恩寵，怎敢耍望與陛下同榻？(駕唱)休煩惱，
吾當且是耍，鬥卿來便當真假。恰才家輦路兒熟滑，怎下的真個長門再不踏！明夜里西宮閣下，
你是必悄聲兒接駕，我則怕六宮人攀例撥琵琶。(下)

(旦云)駕回了也。左右，且掩上宮門，我睡些去。(下)　　

第二折
(番王引部落上，云)某呼韓單于。昨遣使臣款漢，請嫁公主與俺；漢皇帝以公主尚幼爲辭，
我心中好不自在。想漢家宮中，無邊宮女，就與俺一個，打甚不緊？直將使臣趕回。我欲待起兵南侵，
又恐怕失了數年和好。且看事勢如何，别做道理。(毛延壽上，云)某毛延壽，只因刷選宮女，
索要金銀，將王昭君美人圖點破，送入冷宮。不想皇帝親幸，問出端的，要將我加刑。我得空逃走了，
無處投奔。左右是左右，將着這一軸美人圖，獻與單于王，着他按圖索要，不怕漢朝不與他。
走了數日，來到這里，遠遠的望見人馬浩大，敢是穹廬也。(做問科，云)頭目，你啟報單於王知道，
說漢朝大臣來投見哩。(卒報科)(番王云)著他過來。(見科，云)你是甚麼人？(毛延壽云)某是漢朝中
大夫毛延壽。有我漢朝西宮閣下美人王昭君，生得絕色。前者大王遣使求公主時，那昭君情願請行，
漢主舍不得的，不肯放來。某再三苦諫，說：「豈可重女色，失兩國之好？」漢主倒要殺我。
某因此帶了這美人圖，獻與大王。可遣使按圖索要，必然得了也。這就是圖樣。(進上看科)(番王云)
世間那有如此女人！若得他做闕氏，我願足矣。如今就差一番官，率領部從，寫書與漢天子，
求索王昭君，與俺和親。若不肯與，不日南侵，江山難保。就一壁廂引控甲士，隨地打獵，延入塞内，
偵候動靜，多少是好！(下)(旦引宮女上，云)妾身王嬙，自前日蒙恩臨幸，不覺又旬月。
主上暱愛過甚，久不設朝。聞的今日升殿去了，我且向妝台邊梳妝一會，收拾整齊，只怕駕來好服侍。
(做對鏡科)(駕上，云)自從西宮閣下得見了王昭君，使朕如癡似醉，久不臨朝。今日方才升殿，
等不的散了，只索再到西宮看一看去。(唱)

【南呂】【一枝花】四時雨露勻，萬里江山秀。忠臣皆有用，高枕已無憂。守着那皓齒星眸，
爭忍的虛白晝。近新來染得些症候，一半兒爲國憂民，一半兒愁花病酒。

【梁州第七】我雖是見宰相，似文王施禮；一頭地離明妃，早宋玉悲秋。怎禁他帶天香著莫定龍衣袖！
他諸餘可愛，所事兒相投；消磨人幽悶，陪伴我閑游；偏宜向梨花月底登樓，芙蓉燭下藏鬮。
體態是二十年挑剔就的溫柔，姻緣是五百載該撥下的配偶，臉兒有一千般說不盡的風流，寡人乞求
他左右，他比那落伽山觀自在無楊柳，見一面得長壽。情繫人心早晚休，則除是雨歇雲收。

(做望見科，云)且不要驚着他，待朕悄地看咱。(唱)

【隔尾】恁的般長門前抱怨的宮娥舊，怎知我西宮下偏心兒夢境熟。愛他晚妝罷，描不成，畫不就，
尚對菱花自羞。(做到旦背後看科)(唱)我來到這妝台背後，元來廣寒殿嫦娥，在這月明裡有。

(旦做見接駕科)(外扮尚書、醜扮常侍上，詩云)調和鼎鼐理陰陽，秉軸持鈞政事堂。只會中書陪伴食。
何曾一日爲君王。某尚書令五鹿充宗是也。這個是内常侍石顯。今日朝罷，有番國遣使來索王嬙和番，
不免奏駕。來到西宮閣下，只索進去。(做見科，云)奏的我主得知：如今北番呼韓單于差一使臣前來，
說毛延壽將美人圖獻與他，索要昭君娘娘和番，以息刀兵；不然，他大勢南侵，江山不可保矣。
(駕云)我養軍千日，用軍一時。空有滿朝文武，那一個與我退的番兵！都是些畏刀避箭的，
恁不去出力，怎生教娘娘和番？(唱)

【牧羊關】興廢從來有，幹戈不肯休。可不食君祿，命懸君口。太平時賣你宰相功勞，
有事處把俺佳人遞流。你們乾請了皇家俸，著甚的分破帝王憂？那壁廂鎖樹的怕彎著手，
這壁廂攀欄的怕攧破了頭。(尚書云)他外國說陛下寵暱王嬙，朝綱盡廢，壞了國家。若不與他，
興兵弔伐。臣想紂王只爲寵妲己，國破身亡，是其鑒也。(駕唱)

【賀新郎】俺又不曾徹青霄高蓋起摘星樓；不說他伊尹扶湯，則說那武王伐紂。有一朝身到黄泉後，
若和他留侯留侯廝遘，你可也羞那不羞？您臥重裀，食列鼎，乘肥馬，衣輕裘。您須見舞春風嫩柳宮腰瘦，
怎下的教他環佩影搖青冢月，琵琶聲斷黑江秋！(尚書云)陛下，咱這里兵甲不利，又無猛將與他相持，
倘或疏失，如之奈何？望陛下割恩與他，以救一國生靈之命。(駕唱)

【鬥蝦蟆】當日個誰展英雄手，能梟項羽頭，把江山屬俺炎劉？全虧韓元帥九里山前戰鬥，十大功勞成就。
恁也丹犀里頭，枉被金章紫綬；恁也朱門里頭，都寵着歌衫舞袖。恐怕邊關透漏，殃及家人奔驟；
似箭穿著雁口，沒個人敢咳嗽。吾當僝僽，他也、他也紅妝年幼，無人搭救。昭君共你每有甚麼
殺父母冤仇？休、休，少不的滿朝中都做了毛延壽！我呵！空掌著文武三千隊，中原四百州；
只待要割鴻溝。陡恁的千軍易得，一將難求！

(常侍云)現今番使朝外等宣。(駕云)罷罷罷！教番使臨朝來。(番使入見科，云)
呼韓耶于差臣南來奏大漢皇帝：北國與南朝自來結交和好，曾兩次差人求公主不與。今有毛延壽，
將一美人圖獻與俺單于。特差臣來，單索昭君爲閼氏，以息兩國刀兵。陛下若不從，俺有百萬雄兵，
刻日南侵，以決勝負。伏望聖鑒不錯。(駕云)且教使臣館驛中安歇去。(番使下)(駕云)您眾文武商量，
有策獻來，可退番兵，免教昭君和番。大抵是欺娘娘軟善，若當時呂後在日，一言之出，誰敢違拗！
若如此，久已後也不用文武，只憑佳人平定天下便了。(唱)

【哭皇天】你有甚事疾忙奏，俺無那鼎鑊邊滾熱油。我道您文臣安社稷，武將定戈矛。您只會文武班頭，
山呼萬歲，舞蹈颺塵，道那聲誠惶頓首。如今陽關路上，昭君出塞；當日未央宮里，女主垂旒。
文武每，我不信你敢差排呂太后。枉以後，龍爭虎鬥，都是俺鸞交鳳友。

(旦云)妾既蒙陛下厚恩，當效一死，以報陛下。妾情願和番，得息刀兵，亦可留名青史。但妾與陛下闈房之情，
怎生抛舍也！(駕云)我可知舍不的卿哩！(尚書云)陛下割恩斷愛，以社稷爲念，早早發送娘娘去罷。(駕唱)

【烏夜啼】今日嫁單于，宰相休生受，早則俺漢明妃有國難投，它那里黄雲不出青山岫。投至兩處凝眸，
盼得一雁横秋。單注着寡人今歲攬閑愁，王嬙這運添憔瘦。翠羽冠，香羅綬，都做了錦蒙頭暖帽，珠絡縫貂裘。

(云)卿等今日先選送明妃到驛中，交付番使，待明日朕親出灞陵橋，送餞一杯去。(尚書云)隻怕使不的，
惹外夷恥笑。(駕云)卿等所言，我都依着。我的意思，如何不依？好歹去送一送。我一會家隻恨毛延壽那廝。(唱)

【三煞】我則恨那忘恩咬主贼禽獸，怎生不畫在凌煙閣上頭？紫台行都是俺手里的眾公侯，
有那椿兒不共卿謀，那件兒不依卿奏，爭忍教第一夜夢迤逗？從今後不見長安望北鬥，生扭作織女牽牛！
(尚書云)不是臣等強逼娘娘和番，奈番使定名索取。況自古以來，多有因女色敗國者。(駕唱)

【二煞】雖然似昭君般成敗都皆有，誰似這做天子的官差不自由！情知他怎收那膘滿的驊騮。
往常時翠轎香兜，兀自倦朱簾揭繡，上下處要成就。誰承望月自空明水自流，恨思悠悠。

(旦云)妾身這一去，雖爲國家大計，爭奈舍不的陛下。(駕唱)

【黄鍾尾】怕娘娘覺饑時吃一塊淡淡鹽燒肉，害渴時喝一杓兒酪和粥。我索摺一枝斷腸柳，餞一杯送路酒。
眼見得趕程途趁宿頭，痛傷心重回首。則怕他望不見鳳閣龍樓，今夜且則向灞陵橋畔宿。(下)　

第三折
(番使擁旦上，奏胡樂科，旦云)妾身王昭君。自從選入宮中，被毛延壽將美人圖點破，送入冷宮。
甫能得蒙恩幸，又被他獻與番王形像。今擁兵來索，待不去，又怕江山有失。沒奈何將妾身出塞和番。
這一去，胡地風霜，怎生消受也！自古道"紅顏勝人多薄命，莫怨春風當自嗟。"(駕引文武内官上，云)
今日灞橋餞送明妃，卻早來到也。(唱)

【雙調】【新水令】錦貂裘生改盡漢宮妝，我則索看昭君圖畫模樣。舊恩金勒短，新恨玉鞭長。
本是對金殿鴛鴦，分飛翼怎承望！

(云)您文武百官計議，怎生退了番兵，免明妃和番者？(唱)

【駐馬聽】宰相每商量，大國使還朝多賜賞。早是俺夫妻悒怏，小家兒出外也搖裝。尚兀自渭城衰柳助淒涼，
共那灞橋流水添惆悵。您偏不斷腸。想娘娘那一天愁都撮在琵琶上。

(做下馬科)(與旦打悲科)(駕云)左右慢慢唱者，我與明妃餞一杯酒。(唱)

【步步嬌】您將那一曲陽關休輕放，俺咫尺如天樣。慢慢捧玉觴，朕本意待尊前捱些時光。
且休問劣了宮商，您則與我半句兒俄延着唱。

(番使云)請娘娘早行，天色晚了也。(駕唱)

【落梅風】可憐俺别離重，你好是歸去的忙。寡人心先到他李陵台上。回頭兒卻才魂夢里想，便休題貴人多忘。

(旦云)妾這一去，再何時得見陛下？把我漢家衣服都留下者。(詩云)正是：今日漢宮人，明朝胡地妾。
忍着主衣裳，爲人作春色。(留衣服科)(駕唱)

【殿前歡】說甚麼留下舞衣裳，被西風吹散舊時香。我委實怕宮車再過青苔巷，猛到椒房，
那一會想菱花鏡里妝，風流相，兜的又横心上。看今日昭君出塞，幾時似蘇武還鄉？

(番使云)請娘娘行罷，臣等來多時了也。(駕云)罷罷罷，明妃，你這一去，休怨朕躬也。
(做别科，駕云)我那里是大漢皇帝！(唱)

【雁兒落】我做了别虞姬楚霸王，全不見守玉關征西將。那里取保親的李左車，送女客的蕭丞相？
(尚書云)陛下不必掛念。(駕唱)

【得勝令】那里也架海紫金梁？枉養着那邊庭上鐵衣郎。您也要左右人扶持，俺可甚糟糠妻不下堂！
您但提起刀鎗，卻早小鹿兒心頭撞。今日央及煞娘娘，怎做的男兒當自強！

(尚書云)陛下，咱回朝去罷。(駕唱)

【川撥棹】怕不待放絲韁，咱可甚鞭敲金鐙響。你管燮理陰陽，掌握朝綱。治國安邦，展土開疆。
假若俺高皇，差你個梅香，背井離鄉，臥雪眠霜。若是他不戀您春風畫堂，我便官封你一字王。

(尚書云)陛下，不必苦死留他，着他去了罷。(駕唱)

【七兄弟】說甚麼大王、不當、戀王嬙，兀良，怎禁他臨去也回頭望！那堪這散風雪旌節影悠颺，
動關山鼓角聲悲壯。

【梅花酒】呀！俺向着這回野悲涼：草已添黄，兔早迎霜；犬褪得毛蒼，人搠起纓鎗；馬負着行裝，
車運着糧，打獵起圍場。他、他、他傷心辭漢主，我、我、我擕手上河梁。他部從入窮荒，我鑾輿返鹹陽。
返鹹陽，過宮牆；過宮牆，繞回廊；繞回廊，近椒房；近椒房，月昏黄；月昏黄，夜生涼；
夜生涼，泣寒螀，綠紗窗；綠紗窗，不量思。

【收江南】呀！不思量除是鐵心腸。鐵心腸也愁淚滴千行。美人圖今夜掛昭陽，我那里從養，
便是我高燒銀燭照紅妝。

(尚書云)陛下回鑾罷，娘娘去遠了也。(駕唱)

【鴛鴦煞】我則索大臣行說一個推辭謊，又則怕筆尖兒那火編修講。不見他花朵兒精神，
怎趁那草地里風光？唱道伫立多時，徘徊半響；猛聽的塞雁南翔，呀呀的聲嘹亮。卻原來滿目牛羊，
是兀那載離恨的氈車半坡里響。(下)

(番王引部落擁昭君上，云)今日漢朝不棄舊盟，將王昭君與俺番家和親。我將昭君封爲寧胡閼氏，坐我正宮。
兩國息兵，多少是好。眾將士，傳下號令，大眾起行，望北而去。(做行科)(旦問云)這里甚地面了？
(番使云)這是黑龍江，番漢交界去處。南邊屬漢家，北邊屬我番國。(旦云)大王，借一杯酒，望南澆奠；
辭了漢家，長行去罷。(做奠酒科，云)漢朝皇帝，妾身今生已矣，尚待來生也。(做跳江科)
(番王驚救不及，歎科，云)嗨，可惜可惜！昭君不肯入番，投江而死。罷罷罷，就葬在此江邊，號爲青塚者。
我想來，人也死了，枉與漢朝結下這般仇隙，都是毛延壽那廝搬弄出來的。把都兒，將毛延壽拿下，
解送漢朝處治。我依舊與漢朝結和，永爲甥舅，卻不是好！(詩云)則爲他丹青畫誤了昭君，
背漢主暗地私奔；將美人圖又來哄我，要索取出塞和親。豈知道投江而死，空落的一見消魂。
似這等奸邪逆贼，留着他終是禍根。不如送他去漢朝哈剌，依還的甥舅禮，兩國長存。(下)

第四折
(駕引内官上，云)自家漢元帝。自從明妃和番，寡人一百日不曾設朝。今當此夜景蕭索，好生煩惱。
且將這美人圖掛起，少解悶懷也呵。(唱)

【中呂】【粉蝶兒】寶殿涼生，夜迢迢六宮人靜。對銀台一點寒燈，枕席間、臨寢處，越顯的吾身薄幸。
萬里龍廷，知他宿誰家一靈真性。

(云)小黄門，你看鑪香盡了，再添上些香。(唱)

【醉春風】燒盡禦鑪香，再添黄串餅。想娘娘似竹林寺不見半分形，則留下這個影、影。
未死之時，再生之日，我可也一般恭敬。

(云)一時困倦，我且睡些兒。(唱)

【叫聲】高唐夢苦難成，那里也愛卿、愛卿，卻怎生無些靈聖？偏不許楚襄王枕上雨雲情。
(做睡科，)(旦上，云)妾身王嬙，一番到北地，私自逃回。兀的不是我主人！陛下，妾身來了也。
(番兵上，云)恰才我打了個盹，王昭君就偷走回去了。我急急趕來，進的漢宮，兀的不是昭君！
(做拿旦下)(駕醒科，云)恰才見昭君回來，這些兒如何就不見了？(唱)

【剔銀燈】恰才這搭兒單于王使命，呼喚俺那昭君名姓。偏寡人喚娘娘不肯燈前應，卻原來是畫上的丹青。
猛聽得仙音院鳳管鳴，更說甚蕭韶九成。

【蔓青菜】白日里無承應，教寡人不曾一覺到天明，做的個團圓夢境。(雁見科)(唱)卻原來雁叫長門兩三聲，
怎知道更有個人孤另。

(雁叫科)(唱)
【白鶴子】多管是春秋高，觔力短，莫不是食水少，骨毛輕？待去後，愁江南網羅寬；待向前，
怕塞北雕弓硬。

【幺篇】傷感似替昭君思漢主，哀怨似作薤露哭田横，淒愴似和半夜夢歌聲，悲切似唱三叠陽關令。
(雁叫科)(云)則被那潑毛團叫的淒楚人也。(唱)

【上小樓】早是我神思不安，又添個冤家纏定。他叫得慢一會兒緊一聲兒，和盡寒更。不爭你打盤鏇，
這搭里同聲相應，可不差訛了四時節令？

【幺篇】你卻待尋子卿、覓李陵，對着銀台，叫醒咱家，對影生情。則俺那遠鄉的漢明妃雖然得命，
不見你個潑毛團也耳根清淨。

(雁叫科)(云)這雁兒呵。(唱)
【滿庭芳】又不是心中愛聽，大古似林風瑟瑟，岩溜冷冷。我隻見山長水遠天如鏡，又生怕誤了你途程。
見被你冷落了瀟湘暮景，更打動我邊塞離情，還說甚雁過留聲。那堪更瑤階夜永，嫌殺月兒明。
(黄門云)陛下省煩惱，龍體爲重。(駕云)不由我不煩惱也。(唱)

【十二月】休道是咱家動情，你宰相每也生憎。不比那雕梁燕語，不比那錦樹鶯鳴。
漢昭君離鄉背井，知他在何處愁聽！

(雁叫科)(唱)
【堯民歌】呀呀的飛過蓼花汀，孤雁兒不離了鳳凰城。畫檐間鐵馬響丁丁，寶殿中禦榻冷清清。
寒也波更，蕭蕭落葉聲，燭暗長門靜。

【隨煞】一聲兒繞漢宮，一聲兒寄渭城；暗添人白發成衰病，直恁的吾家可也勸不省。

(尚書上，云)今日早朝散後，有番國差使命綁送毛延壽來，說因毛延壽叛國敗盟，致此禍釁。今昭君已死，
情願兩國講和。伏候聖旨。(駕云)既如此，便將毛延壽斬首祭獻明妃。着光祿寺大排筵席，犒賞來使回去。
(詩云)葉落深宮雁叫時，夢回孤枕夜相思。雖然青塚人何在，還爲蛾眉斬畫師。

題目沉黑江明妃青塚恨

正名破幽夢孤雁漢宮秋






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Han Gong Qiu, by Zhiyuan Ma

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HAN GONG QIU ***

***** This file should be named 52199-0.txt or 52199-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/2/1/9/52199/

Produced by Hsin-Ju Lan
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

