The Project Gutenberg EBook of Yingying's Biography, by Yuan Zhen

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Yingying's Biography

Author: Yuan Zhen

Release Date: June 8, 2016 [EBook #52267]

Language: Chinese

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK YINGYING'S BIOGRAPHY ***




Produced by Wang Yu-Chun






Title: 鶯鶯傳 _Yingying's Biography)

Author: 元稹 (Yuan Zhen)


唐貞元中，有張生者，性溫茂，美風容，內秉堅孤，非禮不可入。或朋從遊宴，擾雜其間，他人皆洶洶拳拳，若將不及；張生容順而已，終不能亂。以是年二十三，未嘗近女色。知者詰之，謝而言曰：“登徒子非好色者，是有兇行。余真好色者，而適不我值。何以言之？大凡物之尤者，未嘗不留連於心，是知其非忘情者也。”詰者識之。

無幾何，張生遊於蒲，蒲之東十餘里，有僧舍曰普救寺，張生寓焉。適有崔氏孀婦，將歸長安，路出於蒲，亦止茲寺。崔氏婦，鄭女也；張出於鄭，緒其親，乃異派之從母。是歲，渾瑊薨於蒲，有中人丁文雅，不善於軍，軍人因喪而擾，大掠蒲人。崔氏之家，財產甚厚，多奴僕，旅寓惶駭，不知所托。先是張與蒲將之黨有善，請吏護之，遂不及於難。十餘日，廉使杜確將天子命以總戎節，令於軍，軍由是戢。鄭厚張之德甚，因飾饌以命張，中堂宴之。復謂張曰：“姨之孤嫠未亡，提攜幼稚，不幸屬師徒大潰，實不保其身，弱子幼女，猶君之生，豈可比常恩哉？今俾以仁兄禮奉見，冀所以報恩也。”命其子，曰歡郎，可十餘歲，容甚溫美。次命女：“出拜爾兄，爾兄活爾。”久之，辭疾，鄭怒曰：“張兄保爾之命，不然，爾且擄矣，能復遠嫌乎？”久之乃至，常服睟容，不加新飾。垂鬟接黛，雙臉銷紅而已，顏色豔異，光輝動人。張驚，為之禮，因坐鄭旁。以鄭之抑而見也，凝睇怨絕，若不勝其體者。問其年紀，鄭曰：“今天子甲子歲之七月，終於貞元庚辰，生年十七矣。”張生稍以詞導之，不對，終席而罷。張自是惑之，願致其情，無由得也。崔之婢曰紅娘，生私為之禮者數四，乘間遂道其衷。婢果驚沮，腆然而奔，張生悔之。翼日，婢復至，張生乃羞而謝之，不復云所求矣。婢因謂張曰：“郎之言，所不敢言，亦不敢泄。然而崔之姻族，君所詳也，何不因其德而求娶焉？”張曰：“余始自孩提，性不苟合。或時?綺間居，曾莫流盼。不為當年，終有所蔽。昨日一席間，幾不自持。數日來，行忘止，食忘飽，恐不能逾旦暮。若因媒氏而娶，納采問名，則三數月間，索我於枯魚之肆矣。爾其謂我何？”婢曰：“崔之貞慎自保，雖所尊不可以非語犯之，下人之謀，固難入矣。然而善屬文，往往沉吟章句，怨慕者久之。君試為喻情詩以亂之，不然則無由也。”張大喜，立綴春詞二首以授之。是夕，紅娘復至，持彩箋以授張曰：“崔所命也。”題其篇曰《明月三五夜》，其詞曰：“待月西廂下，近風戶半開。拂牆花影動，疑是玉人來。”張亦微喻其旨，是夕，歲二月旬有四日矣。崔之東有杏花一株，攀援可踰。既望之夕，張因梯其樹而踰焉，達於西廂，則戶半開矣。紅娘寢於床，生因驚之。紅娘駭曰：“郎何以至？”張因紿之曰：“崔氏之箋召我也，爾為我告之。”無幾，紅娘復來，連曰：“至矣！至矣！”張生且喜且駭，必謂獲濟。及崔至，則端服嚴容，大數張曰：“兄之恩，活我之家，厚矣。是以慈母以弱子幼女見托。奈何因不令之婢，致淫逸之詞，始以護人之亂為義，而終掠亂以求之，是以亂易亂，其去幾何？試欲寢其詞，則保人之姦，不義；明之於母，則背人之惠，不祥；將寄與婢僕，又懼不得發其真誠。是用託短章，願自陳啟，猶懼兄之見難，是用鄙靡之詞，以求其必至。非禮之動，能不愧心，特願以禮自持，無及於亂。”言畢，翻然而逝。張自失者久之，復踰而出，於是絕望。數夕，張生臨軒獨寢，忽有人覺之。驚駭而起，則紅娘斂衾攜枕而至。撫張曰：“至矣！至矣！睡何為哉？”並枕重衾而去。張生拭目危坐久之，猶疑夢寐，然而修謹以俟。俄而紅娘捧崔氏而至，至則嬌羞融冶，力不能運支體，曩時端莊，不復同矣。是夕旬有八日也，斜月晶瑩，幽輝半床。張生飄飄然，且疑神仙之徒，不謂從人間至矣。有頃，寺鐘鳴，天將曉，紅娘促去。崔氏嬌啼宛轉，紅娘又捧之而去，終夕無一言。張生辨色而興，自疑曰：“豈其夢邪？”及明，睹妝在臂，香在衣，淚光熒熒然，猶瑩於茵席而已。是後又十餘日，杳不復知。張生賦《會真詩》三十韻，未畢，而紅娘適至。因授之，以貽崔氏。自是復容之，朝隱而出，暮隱而入，同安於曩所謂西廂者，幾一月矣。張生常詰鄭氏之情，則曰：“我不可奈何矣。”因欲就成之。

無何，張生將之長安，先以情喻之。崔氏宛無難詞，然而愁怨之容動人矣。將行之再夕，不可復見，而張生遂西下。數月，復遊於蒲，會於崔氏者又累月。崔氏甚工刀劄，善屬文，求索再三，終不可見。往往張生自以文挑，亦不甚睹覽。大略崔之出人者，藝必窮極，而貌若不知；言則敏辯，而寡於酬對。待張之意甚厚，然未嘗以詞繼之。時愁豔幽邃，恒若不識；喜慍之容，亦罕形見。異時獨夜操琴，愁弄悽惻，張竊聽之，求之，則終不復鼓矣。以是愈惑之。張生俄以文調及期，又當西去。當去之夕，不復自言其情，愁歎於崔氏之側。崔已陰知將訣矣，恭貌怡聲，徐謂張曰：“始亂之，終棄之，固其宜矣，愚不敢恨。必也君亂之，君終之，君之惠也；則歿身之誓，其有終矣，又何必深感於此行？然而君既不懌，無以奉寧。君常謂我善鼓琴，向時羞顏，所不能及。今且往矣，既君此誠。”因命拂琴，鼓《霓裳羽衣序》，不數聲，哀音怨亂，不復知其是曲也。左右皆噓唏，崔亦遽止之。投琴，泣下流連，趨歸鄭所，遂不復至。明旦而張行。

明年，文戰不勝，張遂止於京，因貽書於崔，以廣其意。崔氏緘報之詞，粗載於此。曰：“ 捧覽來問，撫愛過深，兒女之情，悲喜交集。兼惠花勝一合，口脂五寸，致耀首膏唇之飾。雖荷殊恩，誰復為容？睹物增懷，但積悲歎耳。伏承使於京中就業，進修之道，固在便安。但恨僻陋之人，永以遐棄，命也如此，知復何言？自去秋已來，常忽忽如有所失，於喧嘩之下，或勉為語笑，閑宵自處，無不淚零。乃至夢寢之間，亦多感咽。離憂之思，綢繆繾綣，暫若尋常；幽會未終，驚魂已斷。雖半衾如暖，而思之甚遙。一昨拜辭，倏逾舊歲。長安行樂之地，觸緒牽情，何幸不忘幽微，眷念無斁。鄙薄之志，無以奉酬。至於終始之盟，則固不忒。鄙昔中表相因，或同宴處，婢僕見誘，遂致私誠，兒女之心，不能自固。君子有援琴之挑，鄙人無投梭之拒。及薦寢席，義盛意深，愚陋之情，永謂終託。豈期既見君子，而不能定情，致有自獻之羞，不復明侍巾幘。沒身永恨，含歎何言？倘仁人用心，俯遂幽眇；雖死之日，猶生之年。如或達士略情，舍小從大，以先配為醜行，以要盟為可欺。則當骨化形銷，丹誠不泯；因風委露，猶託清塵。存沒之誠，言盡於此；臨紙嗚咽，情不能申。千萬珍重！珍重千萬！玉環一枚，是兒嬰年所弄，寄充君子下體所佩。玉取其堅潤不渝，環取其終始不絕。兼亂絲一絇，文竹茶碾子一枚。此數物不足見珍，意者欲君子如玉之真，弊志如環不解，淚痕在竹，愁緒縈絲，因物達情，永以為好耳。心邇身遐，拜會無期，幽憤所鍾，千里神合。千萬珍重！春風多厲，強飯為嘉。慎言自保，無以鄙為深念。”張生發其書於所知，由是時人多聞之。所善楊巨源好屬詞，因為賦《崔娘詩》一絕云：“清潤潘郎玉不如，中庭蕙草雪銷初。風流才子多春思，腸斷蕭娘一紙書。”河南元稹，亦續生《會真詩》三十韻。詩曰：微月透簾櫳，螢光度碧空。遙天初縹緲，低樹漸蔥朧。龍吹過庭竹，鸞歌拂井桐。羅綃垂薄霧，環珮響輕風。絳節隨金母，雲心捧玉童。更深人悄悄，晨會雨濛濛。珠瑩光文履，花明隱繡龍。瑤釵行彩鳳，羅帔掩丹虹。言自瑤華浦，將朝碧玉宮。因遊洛城北，偶向宋家東。戲調初微拒，柔情已暗通。低鬟蟬影動，回步玉塵蒙。轉面流花雪，登床抱綺叢。鴛鴦交頸舞，翡翠合歡籠。眉黛羞偏聚，唇朱暖更融。氣清蘭蕊馥，膚潤玉肌豐。無力傭移腕，多嬌愛斂躬。汗流珠點點，髮亂綠蔥蔥。方喜千年會，俄聞五夜窮。留連時有恨，繾綣意難終。慢臉含愁態，芳詞誓素衷。贈環明運合，留結表心同。啼粉流宵鏡，殘燈遠暗蟲。華光猶苒苒，旭日漸曈曈。乘鶩還歸洛，吹簫亦上嵩。衣香猶染麝，枕膩尚殘紅。冪冪臨塘草，飄飄思渚蓬。素琴鳴怨鶴，清漢望歸鴻。海闊誠難渡，天高不易沖。行雲無處所，蕭史在樓中。張之友聞之者，莫不聳異之，然而張志亦絕矣。稹特與張厚，因徵其詞。張曰：“大凡天之所命尤物也，不妖其身，必妖於人。使崔氏子遇合富貴，乘寵嬌，不為雲，不為雨，為蛟為螭，吾不知其所變化矣。昔殷之辛，周之幽，據百萬之國，其勢甚厚。然而一女子敗之，潰其眾，屠其身，至今為天下僇笑。予之德不足以勝妖孽，是用忍情。”於時坐者皆為深歎。

後歲餘，崔已委身於人，張亦有所娶。適經所居，乃因其夫言於崔，求以外兄見。夫語之，而崔終不為出。張怨念之誠，動於顏色，崔知之，潛賦一章，詞曰：“自從消瘦減容光，萬轉千迴懶下床。不為旁人羞不起，為郎憔悴卻羞郎。”竟不之見。後數日，張生將行，又賦一章以謝絕云：“棄置今何道，當時且自親。還將舊時意，憐取眼前人。”自是絕不復知矣。時人多許張為善補過者。予常於朋會之中，往往及此意者，夫使知者不為，為之者不惑。貞元歲九月，執事李公垂，宿於予靖安里第，語及於是。公垂卓然稱異，遂為《鶯鶯歌》以傳之。崔氏小名鶯鶯，公垂以命篇。






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Yingying's Biography, by Yuan Zhen

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK YINGYING'S BIOGRAPHY ***

***** This file should be named 52267-0.txt or 52267-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/2/2/6/52267/

Produced by Wang Yu-Chun
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

