The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Pair of Peacocks Southeast Fly (Kung
Chiao Tung Nan Fei), by Unknown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: A Pair of Peacocks Southeast Fly (Kung Chiao Tung Nan Fei)

Author: Unknown

Release Date: June 8, 2016 [EBook #52275]

Language: Chinese

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A PAIR OF PEACOCKS SOUTHEAST FLY ***




Produced by Huang Bing-Jun






Title: 孔雀東南飛 (A Pair of Peacocks Southeast Fly) (Kung Chiao Tung Nan Fei)
Author: Unknown




《孔雀東南飛》    作者：不詳


漢末建安中，廬江府小吏焦仲卿妻劉氏，為仲卿母所遣，自誓不嫁。其家逼之，乃投水而死。仲卿聞之，亦自縊于庭樹。時人傷之，為詩云爾。


孔雀東南飛　　五里一徘徊

十三能織素　　十四學裁衣
十五彈箜篌　　十六誦詩書
十七為君婦　　心中常苦悲
君既為府吏　　守節情不移
賤妾留空房　　相見常日稀
雞鳴入機織　　夜夜不得息
三日斷五疋　　大人故嫌遲
非為織作遲　　君家婦難為
妾不堪驅使　　徒留無所施
便可白公姥　　及時相遣歸

府吏得聞之　　堂上啟阿母
兒已薄祿相　　幸復得此婦
結髮同枕席　　黃泉共為友
共事二三年　　始爾未為久
女行無偏斜　　何意致不厚

阿母謂府吏　　何乃太區區
此婦無禮節　　舉動自專由
吾意久懷忿　　汝豈得自由
東家有賢女　　自名秦羅敷
可憐體無比　　阿母為汝求
便可速遣之　　遣之慎莫留

府吏長跪答　　伏惟啟阿母
今若遣此婦　　終老不復取

阿母得聞之　　捶牀便大怒
小子無所畏　　何敢助婦語
吾已失恩義　　會不相從許

府吏默無聲　　再拜還入戶
舉言謂新婦　　哽咽不能語
我自不驅卿　　逼迫有阿母
卿但暫還家　　吾今且報府
不久當歸還　　還必相迎取
以此下心意　　慎勿違吾語

新婦謂府吏　　勿復重紛紜
往昔初陽歲　　謝家來貴門
奉事循公姥　　進止敢自專
晝夜勤作息　　伶俜縈苦辛
謂言無罪過　　供養卒大恩
仍更被驅遣　　何言復來還
妾有繡腰襦　　葳蕤自生光
紅羅復斗帳　　四角垂香囊
箱簾六七十　　綠碧青絲繩
物物各自異　　種種在其中
人賤物亦鄙　　不足迎後人
留待作遣施　　於今無會因
時時為安慰　　久久莫相忘

雞鳴外欲曙　　新婦起嚴妝
著我繡裌裙　　事事四五通
足下躡絲履　　頭上瑇瑁光
腰若流紈素　　耳著明月璫
指如削蔥根　　口如含朱丹
纎纎作細步　　精妙世無雙

上堂拜阿母　　母聽去不止
昔作女兒時　　生小出野里
本自無教訓　　兼媿貴家子
受母錢帛多　　不堪母驅使
今日還家去　　念母勞家裏

卻與小姑別　　淚落連珠子
新婦初來時　　小姑始扶牀
今日被驅遣　　小姑如我長
勤心養公姥　　好自相扶將
初七及下九　　嬉戲莫相忘
出門登車去　　涕落百餘行

府吏馬在前　　新婦車在後
隱隱何甸甸　　俱會大道口
下馬入車中　　低頭共耳語
誓不相隔鄉　　且暫還家去
吾今且赴府　　不久當還歸
誓天不相負

新婦謂府吏　　感君區區懷
君既若見錄　　不久望君來
君當作盤石　　妾當作蒲葦
蒲葦紉如絲　　盤石無轉移
我有親父兄　　性行暴如雷
恐不任我意　　逆以煎我懷
舉手長勞勞　　二情同依依

入門上家堂　　進退無顏儀
阿母大拊掌　　不圖子自歸
十三教汝織　　十四能裁衣
十五彈箜篌　　十六知禮儀
十七遣汝嫁　　謂言無誓違
汝今無罪過　　不迎而自歸
蘭芝慙阿母　　兒實無罪過
阿母大悲摧

還家十餘日　　縣令遣媒來
云有第三郎　　窈窕世無雙
年始十八九　　便言多令才

阿母謂阿女　　汝可去應之
阿女含淚答　　蘭芝初還時
府吏見丁甯　　結誓不別離
今日違情義　　恐此事非奇
自可斷來信　　徐徐更謂之

阿母白媒人
貧賤有此女　　始適還家門
不堪吏人婦　　豈合令郎君
幸可廣問訊　　不得便相許

媒人去數日　　尋遣丞請還
說有蘭家女　　承籍有宦官
云有第五郎　　嬌逸未成婚
遣丞為媒人　　主簿通語言
直說太守家　　有此令郎君
既欲結大義　　故遣來貴門

阿母謝媒人
女子先有誓　　老姥豈敢言

阿兄得聞之　　悵然心中煩
舉言為阿妹　　作計何不量
先嫁得府吏　　得後嫁郎君
否泰如天地　　足以榮汝身
不嫁義即體　　其住欲何云

蘭芝仰頭答　　理實如兄言
謝家事夫婿　　中道還兄門
處分適兄意　　那得自任專
雖與府吏要　　渠會永無緣
登即相許和　　便可作婚姻

媒人下牀去　　諾諾復爾爾
還部白府君
下官奉使命　　言談大有緣
府君得聞之　　心中大歡喜
視歷復開書　　便利此月內
六合正相應　　良吉三十日
今已二十七　　卿可去成婚
交語速裝束　　駱驛如浮雲
青雀白鵠舫　　四角龍子幡
婀娜隨風轉　　金車玉作輪
躑躅青驄馬　　流蘇金鏤鞍
齎錢三百萬　　皆用青絲穿
雜綵三百疋　　交廣市鮭珍
從人四五百　　鬱鬱登郡門

阿母謂阿女
適得府君書　　明日來迎汝
何不作衣裳　　莫令事不舉

阿女默無聲
手巾掩口啼　　淚落便如瀉
移我琉璃榻　　出置歬窻下
左手持刀尺　　右手執綾羅
朝成繡裌裙　　晚成單羅衫
晻晻日欲瞑　　愁思出門啼

府吏聞此變　　因求假暫歸
未至二三里　　摧藏馬悲哀
新婦識馬聲　　躡履相逢迎
悵然遙相望　　知是故人來
舉手拍馬鞍　　嗟歎使心傷
自君別我後　　人事不可量
果不如先願　　又非君所詳
我有親父母　　逼迫兼弟兄
以我應他人　　君還何所望

府吏謂新婦　　賀卿得高遷
盤石方可厚　　可以卒千年
蒲葦一時紉　　便作旦夕間
卿當日勝貴　　吾獨向黃泉

新婦謂府吏　　何意出此言
同是被逼迫　　君爾妾亦然
黃泉不相見　　勿違今日言

執手分道去　　各各還家門
生人作死別　　恨恨那可論
念與世間辭　　千萬不復全

府吏還家去　　上堂拜阿母
今日大風寒
寒風摧樹木　　嚴霜結庭蘭
兒今日冥冥　　令母在後單
故作不良計　　勿復怨鬼神
命如南山石　　四體康且直

阿母得聞之　　零淚應聲落
汝是大家子　　仕宦於臺閣
慎勿為婦死　　貴賤情何薄
東家有賢女　　窈窕豔城郭
阿母為汝求　　便復在旦夕

府吏再拜還　　長歎空房中
作計乃爾立　　轉頭向戶裏
漸見愁煎迫

其日馬牛嘶　　新婦入青廬
菴菴黃昏後　　寂寂人定初
我命絕今日　　魂去尸長留
攬裙脫絲履　　舉身赴清池

府吏聞此事　　心知長別離
徘徊庭樹下　　自掛東南枝

兩家求合葬　　合葬華山傍
東西植松栢　　左右種梧桐
枝枝相覆蓋　　葉葉相交通
中有雙飛鳥　　自名為鴛鴦
仰頭相向鳴　　夜夜達五更
行人駐足聽　　寡婦起彷徨
多謝後世人　　戒之慎勿忘






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Pair of Peacocks Southeast Fly (Kung
Chiao Tung Nan Fei), by Unknown

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A PAIR OF PEACOCKS SOUTHEAST FLY ***

***** This file should be named 52275-0.txt or 52275-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/2/2/7/52275/

Produced by Huang Bing-Jun
Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

