The Project Gutenberg eBook, Bunny Rabbit's Diary, by Mary Frances
Blaisdell, Illustrated by George F. Kerr


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net





Title: Bunny Rabbit's Diary


Author: Mary Frances Blaisdell



Release Date: November 2, 2005  [eBook #16982]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BUNNY RABBIT'S DIARY***


E-text prepared by Al Haines



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original lovely illustrations.
      See 16982-h.htm or 16982-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/6/9/8/16982/16982-h/16982-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/6/9/8/16982/16982-h.zip)





BUNNY RABBIT'S DIARY

by

MARY FRANCES BLAISDELL

Author of "Boy Blue and His Friends," "Polly and Dolly," "Cherry Tree
Children," "Tommy Tinker's Book," "Twilight Town," "Pretty Polly
Flinders," etc.

Illustrated By George F. Kerr

School Edition






[Frontispiece: Sometimes Bunny talked to Mrs. Duck.]




Boston
Little, Brown, And Company
Copyright, 1915,
by Little, Brown, And Company.
All Rights reserved





PREFACE

Bunny Rabbit had a book for Christmas.  Mother Rabbit made it for him
out of maple leaves, pinned together with thorns from the rose-bush on
the stone wall.  Bunny clapped his hands when he saw the book, and sat
down at once on the old stump to read the stories.  But there was not a
story in the whole book--no, not one!  There wasn't even a picture.

"You must write the book yourself," Mother Rabbit told him.  "Then you
will be sure to like it."

So Bunny Rabbit wrote the book about the good times he had with Bobtail
and Billy, and all his other playmates.  He wrote about the slide they
made on the long hill beside the pond; about Mrs. Duck's swimming
lesson, and the kite Bobtail made out of a leaf from the big oak tree;
about Sammy Red Squirrel's flying machine, and Bobby Gray Squirrel's
peanut party.

He hid the book in the hollow tree where no one would find it. But some
one did find it,--some one who knew how to read the funny little tracks
of rabbit writing,--and here are the stories in Bunny Rabbit's Diary.




  CONTENTS


  BUNNY RABBIT'S DIARY
  BILLY'S SLIDE
  A CHRISTMAS TREE
  BOBTAIL'S KITE
  APRIL FOOL'S DAY
  MRS. DUCK'S SECRET
  THE SWIMMING LESSON
  THE CLOVER PATCH
  MOVING DAY
  A SUMMER SHOWER
  SAMMY'S FLYING MACHINE
  THE CABBAGE PATCH
  THE WHITE RABBIT
  TEDDY BEAR
  BOBBY'S PARTY




FULL-PAGE ILLUSTRATIONS IN COLOR


Sometimes Bunny talked to Mrs. Duck . . . _Frontispiece_

Bunny put the acorn in front of Sammy's door

"Croak, croak!" said Mr. Green Frog

"Quack, quack!  Where did _you_ come from?"




ILLUSTRATIONS IN THE TEXT


Bunny played with the gray squirrel

The sled went on down the hill

The squirrel hunted for nuts

Once Bunny Rabbit saw a Christmas tree

Mrs. Duck was always in a hurry

He put one foot in the water

"I think it will rain to-day"

Down to the ground Sammy fell

She wrapped his nose up in flannel

"Cock-a-doodle-doo!" called the rooster

"This bag is full of peanuts"

They ate all the nuts they wanted




BUNNY RABBIT'S DIARY

Mr. and Mrs. Rabbit and the three little rabbits lived in the woods.

Each little rabbit had a name.

There was Bunny Rabbit, Bobtail Rabbit, and Billy Rabbit.

Bunny was full of fun, and liked to play tricks on his brothers.

Bobtail liked to play with Bunny.  He was always ready to join in all
the fun.

But Billy was lazy.  He did not like to work, and he did not like to
play.

He liked to curl up in the tall grass and sleep.

The rabbits had many playmates in the woods and fields.

They played with the gray squirrels that lived in the big oak tree.

They played with the red squirrels that lived in the old stone wall.

Sometimes Bunny ran down to the brook to visit old Mr. Green Frog.

Sometimes he talked to Mrs. Duck, when she came to the brook to teach
her little ones to swim.

There was always something to do; and Bunny, and Bobtail, and Billy
were always doing something.

[Illustration: Bunny played with the gray squirrel.]

One Christmas Mrs. Rabbit gave Bunny a book.

She made it herself out of maple leaves.

She pinned the leaves together with thorns from the rose-bush that grew
on the wall.

When Bunny saw the book he jumped up and down and clapped his hands.

"Oh, goody, goody!" he said.  "What a pretty book this is."

"I will sit down on the old stump and read the stories this very
minute."

So Bunny sat down on the stump and opened his book.

He opened the book and looked at the first leaf.

There was no story to read.

He looked at the next leaf.

There was no story to read.

He turned one leaf and then another.

They were all alike.

There was not a story in the book, and Bunny could not find one picture.

"This is a funny book," he said to himself.  "I will run and ask Mother
Rabbit what kind of a book this is."

So Bunny jumped off the stump and ran to find Mother Rabbit.

"Mother Rabbit," he said, "what kind of a book is this?

"There are no pictures, and I can not find one story to read."

"That is a diary," said Mother Rabbit.  "You must write the stories in
the book yourself."

"What stories shall I write?" asked Bunny.

"You can write about the good times you and Bobtail and Billy have,
playing in the woods," said Mother Rabbit.

"What fun!" said Bunny.  "I am going to write a story in my book this
very morning."

So Bunny Rabbit ran back to the big stump.

But he did not know just how to write a story.

He had never written one before.

He thought, and thought, and thought.

Bobtail and Billy hopped up to see what their brother was doing.

"Come down and play with us," said Bobtail.

But Bunny shook his head, and shook his long ears.

"Run away now," he said; "I am going to write a story."

"What story are you going to write?" asked Billy.

But Bunny did not answer.  He had just thought of something funny.

It was about the slide on the long hill beside the pond.

And about the way Billy slid down,--right into the cold water.

Bobtail and Billy ran away and left Bunny alone on the stump.

Ho was very busy writing in his maple-leaf book.

When he finished the story, he hid his book in the hollow tree.

"No one will find it there," he said to himself, as he hopped off
toward home.

"I'll write a story every day until the book is full."

But one day I went walking in the woods.

I found the hollow tree, and I found the little maple-leaf book.

"Bunny Rabbit's Diary" was the name of the book.

It was all full of stories about the three little rabbits that lived in
the woods.




BILLY'S SLIDE

I

One morning in winter Bunny opened his eyes, just as the big round sun
peeped up from behind the hills.

He jumped up and shook himself.

Then he pulled Bobtail's long ears to wake him up.

Bobtail rolled out of bed, and that waked Billy.

"Oh, I am so sleepy!" said Billy.  "I don't want to get up now."

"Let's run out and find something for breakfast," said Bunny.  "I am as
hungry as a bear."

"Yes, let's run out and find some breakfast," said Bobtail.

"I don't want to go far," said Billy.  "It is too cold."

The three little rabbits hopped off through the woods, hunting for
something good to eat.

The ground was covered with snow and they could not find very much.

As they hopped along they were talking about what they could do to have
some fun.

"Let's make a long slide to-day," said Bunny.

"Oh, let's make a big pile of snowballs," said Bobtail.

"Let's make a snow rabbit," said Billy.  "We can make it in front of
our house."

Bunny jumped up and down in the snow.  He made a snowball and threw it
at Billy.

"Oh!  I like to play in the snow," he said.  "I like to play in the
snow."

Plump!  Something hit Bunny on the head.

"I like to play, too," some one called to the rabbits.

Bunny looked up to see who was talking.

Plump!  Something hit him right on the end of his nose.

"Hello, Bunny!" called Bobby Gray Squirrel.  "I hit you that time."

"Come down here and I will catch you," said Bunny, as he rubbed his
little pink nose.

But Bobby only laughed and ran higher up among the branches of the oak
tree.

"I will catch you some day," said Bunny as he hopped away.

"Oh, no!" answered Bobby.  "You can never catch me.  You cannot climb a
tree."

The three rabbits soon found some tender little roots hidden under the
blanket of snow.

"This is a good breakfast," said Bunny.

"Yes, it is a very good breakfast," said Billy, as he nibbled on the
root he had found.

At last Bunny jumped up and shook his long ears.

"I have finished my breakfast," he said.

"So have I," said Billy.

"So have I," said Bobtail.

"Now we can make a long slide over in the meadow," said Bunny.

"I know where we can make the best slide," said Bobtail.

"Where, where?" asked Bunny.

"Over on the hill beside the pond," said Bobtail.

"That is too far away," said Billy.  "I think I will go home."

But Bunny and Bobtail would not let him.  They took hold of his hand,
and made him hop along with them through the snow.

"Where are you going?" called Bobby Gray Squirrel.

"Follow us and you will see," answered Bunny.

"Oh, no," said Bobby.  "I like best to run about in this big tree.

"After I have found something to eat I shall curl up in my warm nest
and go to sleep.

"Summer is the time to play, but winter is the time to sleep."



II

The little rabbits hopped off through the woods.

Soon they came to the long hill.

They stood at the top of the hill and looked down at the pond.

"Is the ice thick on the pond?" asked Bunny.

"Oh, yes," said  Bobtail.  "Jack Frost covered the pond with ice last
night."

"But Mr. Sun is shining to-day," said Billy.

"Sometimes he turns the ice back to water again."

"I know that ice is very thick," said Bobtail.

"All right," said Bunny; "now let's make the slide."

Bunny hopped down the hill and made a little path in the snow.

Bobtail hopped down the path after him.  Then Billy hopped down the
path.

The three rabbits hopped up and down the path until the slide was
smooth and hard.

At last Billy said, "Now let's try the slide.  Here is a sled that
belongs to one of the boys."

Billy sat down on the sled and tucked his feet under him.

Bobtail sat down behind Billy.

And last of all came Bunny.

"Hold on tight," called Bunny.  "I will give you a good start."

Bunny pushed hard and the sled began to slide.

He pushed harder and the sled began to slide faster.

"Now I am going to jump on," cried Bunny.

He ran as fast as he could and gave a good big jump.

Down he came, but not on the sled.

Oh, no!  He came down hard on the slide.

He bumped his nose and that made two little tears roll down his cheeks.

When he brushed the tears away he looked to see where the sled was.

[Illustration: The sled went on down the hill.]

It was half way down the hill and going faster every minute.

"Wait for me," shouted Bunny, and he started to run after the sled.

Bobtail heard Bunny call, and turned around to see what had happened.

"Look, look!" he said to Billy.  "Bunny has fallen off the sled and
hurt himself.

"What shall we do?  What shall we do?"

Then Bobtail did a very silly thing.

He jumped up on the sled to call to Bunny.

He jumped up, and the sled went on down the hill.

It left Bobtail rolling over and over in the snow.

And he rolled, head first, right into a snow-bank.

Bobtail didn't like that very well.  He kicked and kicked to get out of
the snow.

He shook his fur coat and he shook his long ears.

Then he looked down the hill to see what had become of Billy.

Billy was on the sled.  And the sled was sliding down the hill.

It came to the pond.

Crack, crack!  Splash, splash! it went.

Crack, crack!  Splash, splash! and Billy slid right into the water.

It was not very deep, but it was very wet.

When Billy climbed out on the bank he was very wet, too.

"Oh, dear me!" he said, "the water is cold."

"Oh, dear me!" said Bobtail, "the snow is cold."

"Oh, dear me!" said Bunny, "I hurt my nose."

"Let's run home to Mother Rabbit," said Billy.

"Yes, let's run home!"

So the three little rabbits hopped along the path through the woods as
fast as they could go.

Bobby Gray Squirrel was running up and down in the big oak tree.

"Come and play with me," he said.

But the little rabbits did not stop to answer.

They hopped along the path as fast as they could go.

And they didn't stop once until they were safe in their own cosy home.




A CHRISTMAS TREE

I

The little pine tree stood near the path that led through the woods.

In summer the rabbits often sat under this tree to rest.

The tree listened to the stories they told of the good times they had
together.

The birds flew to its branches and talked to each other about the
things they had seen in the woods.

Bobby Gray Squirrel and his brothers often ran up into the pine tree to
play tag.

But Sammy Red Squirrel knew something about this tree that no one else
knew.

He knew where there was a small hole in one of the branches.

He found it one day when he ran up into the tree to eat a nut.

And when he saw the hole he said to himself, "That is a good place to
hide some nuts for the winter."

The hole was not very large, but Sammy hid ten acorns in it.  He packed
them in one by one.

Last of all he put a piece of bark in the hole.

"This is a good door for my store-house," he said, "I am sure no one
will find these acorns."

And no one did find them.

Sammy ran to the hole very often and lifted the door just a crack.

The ten little acorns were just where he had put them.

"I will eat these nuts last of all," he said to himself.

All through the fall the little red squirrel hunted for nuts under the
trees.

Sometimes he could not find any on the ground.

Then he would run round and round hunting for holes where he had hidden
acorns away.

If the holes were empty Sammy knew some other little squirrel had been
there before him.

And sometimes Sammy found nuts that other squirrels had stored away.

The hunting was always good, and no squirrel ever went to bed hungry.

But at last Jack Frost came and covered everything with snow.

All the nuts and acorns were frozen into the ground so the squirrels
could not dig them out.

[Illustration: The squirrel hunted for nuts.]

Then Sammy went to his store-house in the stone wall or in some old
stump.

At last it became very cold.

North Wind blew through the woods.

The water in the little brook was covered with ice.

The birds tried to keep warm among the branches of the evergreen trees.

The rabbits slept in their warm home and did not come out very often.

The squirrels slept in their nests, and did not come out for days and
days.

Blacky Crow stayed in the deep woods where the largest trees helped to
keep him warm.

The ground had been covered with snow for two or three weeks.

And the squirrels and rabbits had taken long, long naps.



II

A few days before Christmas, Mr. Sun came up from behind the hills and
shone brightly all day long.

He melted the snow in the warm hollows, and softened the ice on the
brooks.

Bunny Rabbit and his brothers came out and hopped around to find roots
to eat.

The squirrels ran up and down the trees, and all around everywhere to
find hidden nuts.

All at once Bunny Rabbit heard a noise.

He sat up on his hind legs and held up his long ears.

The other rabbits listened, too.

Sammy and Bobby heard the noise and scampered up into the little pine
tree.

"Bow-wow-wow!" barked Jip, as he ran through the woods.

"It's the dog!" cried Bunny.  "Let's run and hide."

The little rabbits whirled around and hopped back to their house.

Sammy and Bobby were safe in the tree, so they did not try to run away.

They heard some one talking and they looked to see who it was.

They saw two children and a man.

The man had an axe in his hand.

The two children ran along the path, talking and laughing.

They were looking at all the evergreen trees.

"This is a good one," said the little boy.

"This is a better one," said the girl, and she pointed right at the
little pine tree where Sammy and Bobby were hiding.

"They are going to cut down this tree," whispered Sammy.  "What shall
we do?  What shall we do?"

But the man did not cut down the tree.

He looked at it and said, "That is too large for our Christmas tree.

"We must find one that is much smaller."

So the man and the two children went along the path into the woods.

And before long the sound of the axe rang out through the stillness.

"I never was so frightened in my life," said Sammy.   "I thought they
were going to cut down this tree."

"I thought so, too," said Bobby.  "But I was not frightened.  I could
jump to that next tree.  It is not very far."

"I know that," said Sammy.  "But I have a store-house in this tree."

"Where is it?" asked Bobby.  "I wish you would show it to me.  I am as
hungry as a bear."

"So am I," said Sammy.  "Let's have dinner now."

"We will call it a Christmas dinner.  The children said this would make
a good Christmas tree," said Bobby.

"I wonder what a Christmas tree is like," said Sammy, as he ran along
the branch to find the store-house.

Bobby followed Sammy and peeped into the hole where the ten acorns were
hidden.

Sammy took out a nut, and Bobby took out a nut.

They sat up on their hind legs and nibbled away happily.

And as they nibbled, the man and the two children and the dog came back
through the woods.

They were dragging a little tree over the snow.

The dog ran along beside them barking loudly.

"That must be a Christmas tree," said Bobby.  "I wonder what they are
going to do with it."

[Illustration: Once Bunny Rabbit saw a Christmas tree.]

"Tweet, tweet!" sang a little sparrow.  "I can tell you.  I saw one
last year.

"I peeped in at the window after the tree had been set up in the warm
room.

"I saw many pretty things hanging on the branches.

"I saw the candles lighted, and Santa Claus came in to give away the
toys to the happy children.

"Oh, it was pretty!  But I like to see the tree in the woods better."

Then the little sparrow flew away, and the two squirrels ate another
nut.

"I think this is a good Christmas tree," said Bobby.

"Yes," said Sammy.  "A tree with a hole full of nuts is better than one
covered with candles and toys."

"It is better for squirrels," said Bobby.  And then he took another nut.




BOBTAIL'S KITE

I

North Wind was playing a game.

He was blowing the dry leaves over the ground.

He piled them up under the oak tree at the edge of the woods.

"Bend your head and bow to me, big oak tree," said North Wind.

The oak tree bowed and bowed its head.

North Wind blew on and on.

As he blew through the woods, every tree bowed, and bowed its head.

Bobtail and Billy and Bunny heard North Wind as he blew past their
house.

"Oh, how the wind blows!" said Bunny.

"I shall stay in the house to-day," said Billy.  "I do not like the
wind."

But Bobtail did not like to stay in the house all day and sleep.

"Let's go out and have a game of tag," he said to his two brothers.

"I will reach the big oak tree first."

Now Bunny and Billy always liked to have a game of tag with Bobtail.

So they both hopped out of their warm house.

"Look out for me!" called North Wind.  "I can catch you all."

Hippity-hop went Bobtail down the path that led to the big oak tree.

And hippity-hop went Billy and Bunny after him.

Just as they came to the oak tree Bobtail saw the pile of leaves.

"Who put all those leaves under this tree?" he said.

"I did, I did," called North Wind.  "And here are some more to make the
pile larger."

Then North Wind puffed out his cheeks and blew more leaves under the
oak tree.

"Oh, what fun!" said Bunny.  "I should like to do that."

Bunny puffed out his cheeks and blew and blew, as hard as he could blow.

But the leaves did not move, until North Wind came to help him.

"This is just the day to fly a kite," said Bobtail.

"Yes," said Billy.  "The children always fly kites when the wind blows."

"I wish we had a kite," said Bunny.  "I should like to see it sail up
in the air and over the trees."

"I can make a kite," said Bobtail.

"How, how?" asked both the other little rabbits together.

"See this big oak leaf," said Bobtail.  "This would make a good kite,
if we had a long string."

"I know where there is a string," said Bunny.  "One of the boys dropped
it out of his pocket the other day.

"It is on the ground, under the pine tree.  I will get it for you."

So Bunny hopped off, and in a minute he was back with the long string.

Bobtail tied the string to the short stem of the oak leaf.

"Let me fly the kite," begged Bunny.

"No, let me," said Billy.

"We will take turns," said Bobtail.  "Bunny may have his turn first."

So Bunny took hold of the string.

He picked the kite up and tossed it into the air just as he had seen
the boys do.

The kite fluttered and fell to the ground at Bunny's feet.

"This is not a good kite," he said.  "It will not fly up into the air."



II

"Let me try now," said Billy.  "I know how to make a kite fly."

So Billy took hold of the string.

Then he climbed up on the old stump and tossed the kite into the air.

"Look, look!" he cried.  "See the kite fly this time."

But the oak leaf just fluttered and fluttered, and fell to the ground
at Billy's feet.

"Something is the matter with this kite," said Billy.  "You did not
make it the right way."

"Oh, yes, I did," said Bobtail.  "I will show you how to make it fly."

All this time North Wind had been very still.

He was watching the three little rabbits trying to fly their kite.

He laughed softly to himself when the leaf fluttered and fell to the
ground.

But North Wind could not keep still very long.

He saw Bobtail take hold of the string of the kite.

"Watch me, watch me!" said Bobtail.

"Watch me, watch me!" sang North Wind.

Then he puffed out his cheeks and blew on the oak leaf as Bobtail gave
it a toss.

Up, up in the air flew the kite, and Bobtail hopped faster and faster
over the ground.

"Look, look!" he cried, "now my kite is going over the tall trees."

Bunny and Billy were sitting on the ground looking up in the air.

They watched the kite fly higher and higher.

"There it goes," called Bobtail.

And just then something else went, too.

Of course Bobtail could not see where he was hopping.

It took both his eyes to watch his kite fly higher and higher.

So he did not see the big stone in the path.

Over the stone he fell,--right into the big pile of leaves under the
oak tree.

Head first he went, and in a second he was all covered up with leaves.

He lost hold of the string, and the kite flew away up in the air.

One of the branches of the oak tree caught the string and held the kite
fast.

"Oh, oh!" whistled North Wind.  "Now it is my turn to fly the kite."

Bobtail did not say a word.

He picked himself out of the big pile of leaves, and shook his long
ears back and forth.

"I don't like to fly kites," he said.  "Let's go home and take a nap."

So the three little rabbits hopped back along the path through the
woods.

North Wind puffed out his cheeks.

"See me fly the kite," he called to the rabbits.

He puffed out his cheeks and blew and blew.

But the leaf only fluttered and fluttered because the branch held the
string fast.

North Wind blew and blew, but he could not make the kite fly away.

"I don't like to fly kites this morning," he said.  "I am going to pile
some more leaves under the oak tree."

So he danced over the ground, and through the woods, singing a gay
little song:

  "Come, little leaves," said the wind one day.

  "Come o'er the meadow with me and play.

  "Put on your dresses of red and gold,

  "For summer has gone and the days grow cold."




APRIL FOOL'S DAY

I

"Wake up, Billy!" called Bunny.  "Wake up and see how hard it is
snowing."

Billy opened his sleepy eyes and rolled out of bed.

Then he went to the door and peeped out.

"April fool, April fool!" shouted Bunny.

Billy laughed.  Then he hopped out of doors.

It was a warm sunny day,--just the day to run around and play jokes.

But first the little rabbits had to find their breakfast.

Now that the warm days were coming they could find plenty to eat.

And Bunny and Billy and Bobtail were growing very fat.

Bobby Gray Squirrel and Sammy Red Squirrel could find plenty to eat,
too.

In the fall they had stored away nuts and acorns in little holes in the
ground.

When Jack Frost covered the ground with snow the squirrels could not
dig up these nuts.

But now the ground was soft again, and Bobby and Sammy had plenty to
eat.

Bunny and Billy and Bobtail saw the squirrels hide the nuts.

They did not like acorns so they never opened the store-house doors.

They just hopped around under the trees looking for green leaves and
tender roots.

But on this first day of April Bunny found the biggest acorn he had
ever seen.

It was hidden in a little hole, and he saw it when he sat down to eat
his breakfast.

"Oh, oh!" he said to himself.  "Now I can play a joke on Bobby Gray
Squirrel.

"I am going to tie a string to this acorn, and when Bobby tries to pick
it up I shall pull it away from him."

He told Bobtail and Billy about the joke he was going to play on the
gray squirrel.

"Ho, ho!" laughed Billy.

"Ha, ha!" laughed Bobtail.

"We must hurry and finish our breakfast," said Bunny.

"Bobby will be out hunting for nuts very soon."

In a few minutes the three rabbits had finished their breakfast.

Then Bunny hopped away to find a string he had seen under the oak tree.

It was the same string they had used to fly their kite.

The string had held the kite to the branch for a long time.

Then one day North Wind came again and tried to carry it away.

He puffed and puffed, and at last the branch let go of the string.

The kite flew up in the air and far away, but the string dropped to the
ground under the oak tree.

There Bunny found it, and he tied the string around the acorn.

Then he scampered back to his brothers.

They were waiting for him near the old stone wall.

"Let's fool Sammy Red Squirrel first," said Billy.

"I saw him run out of his hole just a minute ago."

Bunny put the acorn in front of Sammy's door.

[Illustration: Bunny put the acorn in front of Sammy's door.]

Then he held on to the other end of the string and hid behind a big
rock.

Bobtail and Billy hid behind the pine tree.

They all kept as still as mice.  They did not even shake one of their
long ears.

"There is Sammy now," whispered Billy.  "I can see him running along
the path."

"Don't make a noise," said Bobtail.

Bunny saw the little red squirrel coming down the path.

He kept very still and held on to the string.



II

Sammy came skipping down the path.

He was singing a gay little tune:

  "One, two, three, four, five, six,

  "I'll watch out for April tricks."

Just then he saw the acorn lying on the ground near his door.

"Look at that!" he said.  "Bobby Gray Squirrel must have been here.

"Something frightened him, and made him drop that nut near my door."

Now Sammy was very fond of big acorns and he had not had one for a long
time.

So he pounced on the acorn.

But it was not there!  Bunny had given the string a quick pull.

Sammy put his hand down on a rock.  There was no acorn to be seen.

"April fool!" shouted Bunny.

"April fool!" shouted Billy and Bobtail.

The three rabbits hopped out from their hiding places.

They laughed and laughed, and Sammy laughed, too.

"That was a good trick," he said.

"We are going to play it on Bobby Gray Squirrel, now," said Bunny.

"May I go with you?" asked Sammy.

"Oh, yes!" said the three rabbits.

So off through the woods they all went.

"Bobby often comes to the big oak tree," said Billy.  "I think that
will be a good place to play the trick."

Bunny put the acorn on the ground, and then they all hid behind the
tree.

They did not wait very long before they saw Bobby coming.

And in another minute Bobby saw the acorn.

"Ho, ho!" he said.  "Sammy Red Squirrel must have dropped that big
acorn.  I will pick it up."

He ran along the ground toward the oak tree.

Bunny held on to the string.

He was going to wait until Bobby took hold of the acorn and then pull
it away.

It was so still that the rabbits could hear Bobby's feet as they
pattered on the ground.

Then all at once it was not still in the woods.

Jip, the dog, came bounding along the little path.

"Bow-wow, bow-wow!" he barked.  "Look out for me.  I am coming."

What a scampering there was!

Bobby forgot all about the acorn and skipped up the oak tree.

Sammy skipped up the tree after him.

The three little rabbits put their ears down on their heads, and hopped
away out of sight.

"Bow-wow, bow-wow!" said Jip.  "Where has every one gone?

"I thought I saw some one under this tree as I came along the path."

The acorn lay on the ground where Bunny had left it.

Four little bright eyes watched Jip from the oak tree.

Sammy wished he could call out "April fool," to Jip.

But he was afraid of dogs, so he kept very still.

Bobby kept still, too, and the three little rabbits hopped along
towards home.

After a while Jip went home.

Then there was a quick scampering down the tree.

One of the squirrels had that big acorn for his dinner.

Was it Sammy or Bobby?




MRS. DUCK'S SECRET

I

Mrs. Duck had a secret.

Bunny knew she had a secret, but she would not tell him what it was.

Bobtail knew she had a secret, and so did Billy.

Bunny saw Bobby Gray Squirrel and asked him if he knew Mrs. Duck's
secret.

But Bobby did not know it, and Sammy Red Squirrel did not know it.

Every day Bunny saw Mrs. Duck walking along the little path that led
through the field.

Sometimes she was going to the barn.

Sometimes she was coming from the barn.

She was always alone.  And she was always in a hurry.

[Illustration: Mrs. Duck was always in a hurry.]

She did not stop to talk to Bunny.

She did not stop to catch any of the little bugs that she saw in the
path.

"I wonder what is the matter with Mrs. Duck," Bunny said to himself.

"I wonder why she walks along this little path every day."

Bunny thought and thought about the secret.

"I will ask Mrs. Duck to tell me her secret," he said.

So Bunny sat down under the maple tree to wait for Mrs. Duck.

He waited and waited.

It was very warm in the field.

After a while Bunny shut his eyes and he fell fast asleep.

He slept such a long time that when he opened his eyes the sun was just
going to bed.

"Well, well!" he said.  "Mrs. Duck must have gone long ago."

Just then he saw Sammy Red Squirrel.

"Have you seen Mrs. Duck to-day?" he asked.

"Oh, yes!" answered Sammy.  "She walked along the path early this
afternoon."

The next day Bunny sat down under the maple tree to watch again.

But this time he was not alone.

He had asked Billy to come with him.

"If you are with me, I shall not to sleep," he said.

So the two little rabbits sat down to wait for Mrs. Duck.

They waited and waited.

It was very warm in the field.  After a while Bunny shut his eyes.
Then Billy shut his eyes, and they both fell fast asleep.

They slept such a long time that when they opened their eyes the sun
was just going to bed.

Bobby Squirrel was sitting in the maple tree over their heads.

"Have you seen Mrs. Duck?" asked Bunny.

"Oh, yes!" answered Bobby.  "She walked along the path early this
afternoon."

"Well, well!" said Bunny.  "I will try again to-morrow.  I will ask
Bobtail to come with me.  Perhaps he can keep awake."



II

The next day the three little rabbits sat under the maple tree to watch
for Mrs. Duck.

They waited and waited.

It was very warm in the field.

After a while the three little rabbits became sleepy.

Then Bobtail jumped up on his feet and began to hop around.

"Let's play tag," he said.  "If we sit here in the sun we shall go to
sleep.

"Then we shall not see Mrs. Duck when she walks along the path."

So the three rabbits played tag.

They ran round and round the maple tree.  They ran back and forth along
the little path.

All at once Bunny heard Mrs. Duck coming across the field.

She was going to the barn.

"Good-morning, Mrs. Duck," said Bunny.

"Where are you going this fine morning?"

"Quack, quack!" said Mrs. Duck, "I am going to the barn."

"Where have you been?" asked Billy.

"Quack, quack!" said Mrs. Duck.  "That is a secret.  I can not tell
you."

Then Mrs. Duck walked quickly along the little path and across the road.

She went into the barn-yard and hunted around for something to eat.

She talked to the other ducks and hens.  But she did not tell them her
secret.

When she had eaten all she wanted she went out of the yard and across
the road.

Then she walked back again along the path across the field.

When she came to the maple tree she saw Bunny and Bobtail and Billy.

And Bunny and Bobtail and Billy saw Mrs. Duck.

"Where are you going, now?" asked Bunny.

"I am going down to the brook," she said.  "That is where my secret is."

"May we go with you?" asked Billy.

"Yes," said Mrs. Duck.  "I will show you my secret if you will all
promise not to tell."

So the three little rabbits hopped along behind Mrs. Duck until they
came to the brook.

The water in the brook was running over the stones and singing a sweet
little song.

Mr. Green Frog was sitting on a stone taking a nap in the warm sun.

"Now, follow me," said Mrs. Duck.  "I will show you my secret."

She led the three rabbits to some bushes that grew close beside the
water.

"Quack, quack!" she said.  "Look in here.  What can you see?"

Bunny peeped in under the bushes.

"Oh, oh!" he said, "how pretty they are."

Billy peeped in under the bushes.

"Oh, oh!" he said, "how many there are."

Bobtail peeped in under the bushes.

"Oh, oh!" he said.  "That is a very good secret."

Now what do you think the three rabbits saw hidden away under the
bushes?

Perhaps you have guessed Mrs. Duck's secret by this time.

Yes! there was a nest full of eggs,--just the prettiest eggs you ever
saw.

Mrs. Duck was very proud of them.

She let the rabbits look at the eggs for a few minutes.

"Now I must cover my eggs up," she said.  "I must keep them warm."

So Mrs. Duck sat down on the nest and cuddled the eggs under her soft
warm wings.

Not one egg could be seen.  And Mrs. Duck sat so still that Bunny
thought she had gone to sleep.



III

Every day after that the rabbits went to visit Mrs. Duck.

But they did not tell the secret to any of their friends.

Then, one day, when the rabbits went to visit Mrs. Duck, she would not
get off the nest.

"Quack, quack!" she said.  "I can not let you see the eggs to-day.  I
you will come to-morrow I will show you what I have in my nest."

So the rabbits hopped away, leaving Mrs. Duck alone on her nest under
the bushes.

The next morning, bright and early, the rabbits hopped along the little
path.

They found Mrs. Duck still sitting in the nest.

They saw some little yellow heads peeping out from under her wings.

"Quack, quack!" she said.  "See my ducks.  They are the prettiest ducks
you ever saw.

"And they have the brightest eyes in the world."

One little duck wriggled out from under her mother's wing and tried to
stand on her little yellow feet.

But they were not strong yet.

"Come back, come back!" said Mrs. Duck.  "You must stay in the nest
until you are strong."

And the little duck wriggled back again under her mother's wing.

"We will come again to see your ducks," said Bunny.

After two or three days the three rabbits went back to see the little
ducks.

There was nothing in the nest under the bushes but a few broken shells.

"Where can the ducks be?" said Bunny.

"Tweet, tweet!" sang the sparrow.  "I saw Mrs. Duck and all the little
ducks going to the barn."

"There they are now," sang another sparrow.

Bunny and Bobtail and Billy looked across the field.

They saw Mrs. Duck leading her family to the barnyard.

Mr. Rooster saw them coming.

He flapped his big wings and flew up on the fence.

"Cock-a-doodle-doo!" he said.  "See Mrs. Duck and all the little ducks."

The three rabbits watched the ducks until they were in the barnyard.

Then they hopped off to the woods to tell Mrs. Duck's secret to all
their friends.




THE SWIMMING LESSON

I

"Quack, quack, quack!" said Mrs. Duck, as she walked along the little
path through the meadow.

"Quack, quack, quack!  Follow me, little ducks."

One, two, three, four, five, six little yellow ducks waddled after
their mother along the little path through the meadow.

Bunny Rabbit was sitting under a tree, fast asleep, and he did not hear
them coming.

He was dreaming of flying away with the little birds.

He could fly high up over the trees and over the houses.

Oh, it was great fun!  All the other rabbits were sitting on the ground
watching him.

"Good-by," he called to Billy.

Then he waked up, and he was not under the oak tree.

"Quack, quack, quack!" said Mrs. Duck.  "What are you talking about,
Bunny?  I cannot see Billy anywhere."

"I was dreaming of flying," said Bunny.  "I said good-by to Billy
because I was going far away."

"Quack, quack!" said Mrs. Duck.  "I should like to see you fly.  You
can't even swim."

"Perhaps I could," said Bunny, "if you would teach me."

"Come with me," said Mrs. Duck "I am going to teach my little ones to
swim, and I will teach you, too."

"Quack, quack!" said all the little ducks, as they waddled after their
mother.

"Come and see how soon we will learn to swim."

Bunny did not like to think that these little ducks could do something
that he could not do.

"I have four feet," he said to himself, "and they have only two.  I am
sure I can do what they can do."

So Bunny jumped up and followed the ducks along the path through the
meadow.

In a few minutes they came to the brook.

The water looked cool to the little ducks.

But the water looked very wet to Bunny.

Mrs. Duck stood on the bank for one minute to talk to her ducklings.

"Follow me," she said, "and do what I do.  Swimming is the easiest
thing in the world.

"When I count three we will all go into the water together."

"I think I will wait and see how you do it," said Bunny.  "That will be
the best way for me to learn."

So Bunny sat down on the bank, and the little ducks stood in a row
behind their mother.

"Now," said Mrs. Duck, "one, two, three,--go!"

At the word "go" they all waddled into the water.

Paddle, paddle, paddle!  Mrs. Duck made her feet go so fast that she
was soon in the middle of the brook.

Paddle, paddle, paddle, went all the little ducks, and they were
swimming after their mother.

"Oh, what fun this is!" said the littlest duck.

"How cool the water is," said the biggest duck.

"Come in, Bunny," called all the ducks.  "Swimming is the easiest thing
in the world."

"Why don't you try it, Bunny?" asked Mr. Green Frog, who was sitting on
a rock close by.

"The water is cool, and swimming is the easiest thing in the world."



II

Bunny sat still on the bank, but he did not say a word.

He watched the ducks swimming round and round in the water.

"All they have to do is to paddle their feet," he said to himself.

"I am sure I can do that.  But I do wish the water was not so wet."

"Are you afraid to come in?" asked Mrs. Duck.

"Are you afraid to come in?" asked Mr. Green Frog.

Of course Bunny was afraid, but he did not like to say so.

At last he stood up and went down to the edge of the brook.

He put one foot in the water, but he pulled it out again very quickly.

[Illustration: He put one foot in the water.]

"Oh, dear!" he said, "the water is so wet."

"You can't swim on dry land," said Mrs. Duck.  "Jump in, and you will
like it, I know."

"Jump in!" said Mr. Green Frog.

Bunny went a step nearer and put two feet in the water.

"Oh, dear!" he thought to himself.  "I never can learn to swim.  I wish
I were back under the tree, fast asleep."

Splash, splash!  Mr. Green Frog jumped into the water close to Bunny's
feet.

It frightened the poor little rabbit and he slipped into the water, too.

"Paddle your feet, paddle your feet!" Mrs. Duck called to him.

But, of course, Bunny did not know how to paddle his feet.

He kicked and kicked and scrambled and splashed around in the brook.

The water ran into his eyes and he could not see.

The water ran into his ears and he could not hear.

The water ran into his mouth and he could not speak.

He kicked and splashed and scrambled until at last he felt his feet
touch the ground.

Then he scrambled up on the bank and threw himself on the soft grass.

"You did not paddle your feet," said Mrs. Duck.

"Watch us," said all the little ducks.  "Do it the way we do."

"Oh, oh!" laughed Mr. Green Frog.  "Do try it again.  It was the
funniest sight I ever saw."

"It may have been funny for you," said Bunny.  "But it was not funny
for me.

"I am so wet, that I shall never be dry again.  And I am afraid I have
spoiled my fur coat."

But Mr. Sun shone down brightly and Bunny was soon dry and warm.

Then he hopped along home by the little path through the woods.

"Swimming may be easy for ducks," he said to himself.

"And flying may be easy for birds.

"Rabbits and squirrels can run and hop and jump.  And that is easy for
them."




THE CLOVER PATCH

I

It was a lovely day in June.

Bunny had been playing all the morning with Billy and Bobtail.

They had played tag, and hide-and-seek, and ever so many other games.

At last they were all tired and hungry.

"I know where there is a great big patch of clover," said Bunny.

"Oh, Bunny!" begged Bobtail, "show us where it is.  I have not had a
taste of clover for ever so long."

"I like clover, too," said Billy.  "Is it very far from here?"

"Oh, no," said Bunny.  "It is down beside the brook."

The three little rabbits hopped off to find the big patch of clover.

They hopped down to the brook, but they could not see any clover there.

"Perhaps it was in the meadow," said Billy.

"The brook runs through the meadow."

"Yes," said Bobtail, "and then it runs through the woods."

"Clover would not grow under the trees," said Bunny.  "It grows in the
fields where the sun shines."

"The sun shines in the meadow," said Billy.  "Let's go down there and
look for the clover patch."

So the three little rabbits hopped off through the field.

They hopped along beside the brook all the way.

"Oh, look!" said Bunny.  "See the fishes swimming in the water."

Billy hopped very close to the brook.

Splash, splash! went something right under his feet.

Billy hopped back and looked all around to see what had happened.

"What was that?" he asked.

"That was old Mr. Green Frog," said Bunny.  "There he is now, sitting
on a rock laughing at you."

"Ho, ho!" laughed Mr. Green Frog.  "I frightened you that time."

"I frightened you, too," said Billy.  "That was why you jumped into the
water."

"Well," said Mr. Green Frog, "you almost hopped on my back.

"Of course I was frightened.  I jumped into the water without looking
to see what was the matter."

"Come, come," said Bunny.  "We must find that clover patch.  I am as
hungry as a bear."

So the three little rabbits hopped off across the meadow.

They could not hop so near the brook now because the ground was soft
and wet.

And the rabbits did not like to wet their feet.

They hopped along, and at last Bunny called out, "Here it is.  Here it
is."

Billy and Bobtail hopped up close to Bunny.

Sure enough, there was the biggest patch of clover they had ever seen.

And how green every leaf was!

The clover was all in blossom, too.

The white blossoms held their heads up to the sun.

The sun smiled to see the pretty white flowers among the green leaves.

Many bees were flying over the clover patch.

They were asking the blossoms for nectar to make sweet honey.

"Buzz, buzz!" sang the bees, as they flew from flower to flower.



II

Bunny and Billy and Bobtail began to nibble the greenest leaves.

They nibbled and nibbled and nibbled.

The bees buzzed and buzzed and buzzed.

"What good honey we can make," said the bees.  "Clover honey is best of
all."

"Oh, how good this clover is," said Billy.  "I am glad I came so far."

"Yes," said Bunny.  "It is the sweetest clover I ever tasted."

"Yes, it is," said Billy.  "I--

"Oh, oh, oh!" he cried.  "Oh, my nose!"

Billy jumped up and hopped round and round.  He rubbed his nose and
wiped the tears out of his eyes.

Bunny and Bobtail stopped eating, and went to see what had happened to
Billy.

"What is the matter?" asked Bunny.

"Oh, my nose!" said Billy.  "I took a bite of clover and something
stung me on the nose."

A bee flew up from the clover and sailed round and round in the air.

"Buzz, buzz, buzz!" said the bee.  "I stung your nose, Billy.  I
thought you were going to eat me."

Bunny saw the bee flying round and round over their heads.

"It must have been a bee that stung you," said Bunny.

Billy looked at the bee.

"I am going home," he said.  "I did not want to come so far anyway.
There are plenty of good things eat in our own field."

So Billy hopped along home very slowly.

He stopped every few steps to rub his poor little nose.

Mother Rabbit saw him coming and went to the door to meet him.

"What is the matter?" she asked.

"I went to the meadow to eat clover," said Billy.  "The bees were there
and one stung me on the nose."

"Rub your nose in the dirt and that will make it feel well again," said
Mother Rabbit.

Billy put some dirt on his nose, and the pain soon went away.

Then Mother Rabbit took him to a place where the grass was tender.

He ate all the dinner he wanted and then went home to take a nap.

Bunny and Bobtail ate their dinner in the meadow.

The clover was so sweet and tender that they wanted to eat it all.

They nibbled and nibbled and nibbled.

But they were both very careful not to nibble any of the blossoms where
the bees were gathering honey.




MOVING DAY

I

It was warm and sunny in the meadows.

It was warm and sunny in the fields.

But in the woods it was cool and shady under the pine trees.

The red squirrels had been playing all the morning.

They had chased each other up and down the trees and along the little
path.

Now Sammy was sitting on the branch of a pine tree resting.

All at once he heard a noise over in the field.

It was a very loud noise and he wondered what it could be.

He could not see the field from the tree where he was sitting.

So he ran down to the ground and skipped along--to the old stone wall.

"Whirr, whirr, whirr!" the noise came nearer and nearer.

"Oh, dear me!" said Sammy.  "I know what that is.  Mr. Man is cutting
the grass in the field.

"Now all the families that live there will have to move out."

Sammy sat still and watched to who would be the first to move.

He had not been sitting on the wall very long when he saw the whole
rabbit family coming out of the field, one behind the other.

Mrs. Rabbit had on her bonnet and shawl.  She was carrying Baby Rabbit
in her arms.

Father Rabbit had a big basket.

Bunny and Bobtail and Billy were hopping along behind, laughing and
talking.

"What fun it is to move," said Bunny.

"I hope we shall find a good home somewhere," said Mother Rabbit.

Bunny and Bobtail and Billy hopped and skipped along.

They hopped ahead of Father Rabbit along the little path that led
through the woods.

When they came to the stone wall they saw Sammy Red Squirrel.

"Good-morning," they called.  "We are moving to-day.  We are looking
for a new home.

"Do you know where we can find one large enough for all of us?"

"No," answered Sammy.  "I know where the house is that Mrs. Robin left,
but that is too small for you."

"Come, come," called Mother Rabbit, "we cannot stop to talk.  We must
find a new home soon.  It is dinner time this very minute."

So the family of rabbits hopped off along the path.

Then Sammy heard a little squeaking noise and he looked to see where it
came from.

"Squeak, squeak!" said Mrs. Field Mouse.  "I was not ready to move.

"I did not want to leave my home in the field this week."

"We can soon find another home," said Mr. Field Mouse.

"Here is one right here.  This is the very place we are looking for."

Mr. Mouse set his bag down beside a hole that he had found near the
stone wall.

Mrs. Mouse looked at the hole and so did all the little mice.

"Perhaps that will do until we can go back to our home in the sunny
field," said Mrs. Mouse.

Then she shook her head and wiped a tear from her eye.

"Oh, dear!" she said.  "I know I shall be very lonely here."

"But we could not stay in the field," said Mr. Mouse.  "A man was
cutting the grass, and I am afraid of that big cutter."

"That is so," said Mrs. Mouse, as she wiped another tear out of her
eye.  "But I shall be glad when we can move back."

"I think this hole will do," said Mr. Mouse.  "I will go in and see."



II

Sammy sat on the wall and watched the mice.

He saw them stop in front of the hole and peep into it.

Then he saw Mr. Mouse go in--head, tail and all.

"That house belongs to some one else," said Sammy.

But Mr. Mouse was in the hole and did not hear what he said.

Mrs. Mouse and the little mice were peeping into the hole and they did
not hear what he said.

In a minute Sammy heard Mr. Mouse call to his family to follow him.

Mrs. Mouse picked up the bag and started into the hole.

All the little mice followed her.

Sammy sat on the wall watching them.

All at once he heard a noise.

Mrs. Mouse heard the noise and jumped back.

She dropped the bag, and it flew open.  Everything spilled out on the
ground.

The next minute Mr. Mouse came scrambling out of the hole.

He had lost off his glasses, and his cap was gone.

"Oh, oh, oh!  That is no home for us.  Some one lives there, now," he
said.

"Who, who, who?" asked all the little mice at once.

Mr. Toad came out to the edge of the hole, winking and blinking.

"I do," he said.  "This is my home.  Who came to visit me?"

"I told you that some one lived there," chattered Sammy Red Squirrel.

"I told you, but you would not listen to me."

"Well, there is no harm done," said Mr. Mouse.  "I just paid Mr. Toad a
visit."

"We must find a home any way," said Mrs. Mouse.  "If we stay here the
cat will catch us."

"There comes the cat now," said Sammy.  "She heard Mr. Mouse squeal
when he came out of the hole."

When the mice heard that the cat was coming, what a scampering there
was.

It did not take the whole family of mice long to find a home under a
big stone.

Sammy jumped off the wall and ran up into the pine tree.

The cat came along the path very slowly.

"Meow, meow!" she said to herself.  "I must find something for
breakfast."

But she did not find the little mice.  They were hiding away under the
big stone.

And she did not find Sammy.  He was safe in the pine tree.

Of course she knew where the mice were hiding.

She saw them when they ran into the hole.

But the stone was too heavy for her to move.

She sat down beside the hole and waited and waited, but not one little
mouse put out his nose.

At last the cat grew tired of waiting, and walked back along the path
to the house.

She found a saucer of milk on the kitchen floor.

And the best of it was that it could not run away and hide like the
mice and squirrels.




A SUMMER SHOWER

I

"Rain, rain, rain!" called Robin Redbreast.

"Rain, rain, rain!  I wish it would rain."

The pretty flowers heard the robin calling for rain.

They lifted up their heads and listened.

They were wishing it would rain, too.  The ground was so dry they could
not find a drop of water to drink.

Mr. Green Frog wished it would rain.

The brook was almost dry, and he did not like that very well.

"Rain, rain, rain!" Robin Redbreast called again.

"Don't call for rain," said Bunny Rabbit.  "I like to have the sun
shine all the time."

"So do I," said Sammy Red Squirrel.  "I do not like to have it rain on
my fur coat."

"See how the flowers hang down their heads," said the robin.

"I am sure they would like to have a drink of fresh water."

"The flowers are sleepy," said Bunny.  "That is why they hang their
heads."

"Quack, quack, quack!" said Mrs. Duck.  "Come, children, we will go
down to the brook."

The duck and all the little ducks waddled across the road and into the
meadow.

Bunny saw them coming and hopped over to meet them.

"Good-morning, Mrs. Duck," he said.  "Where are you going?"

"We are going to the brook to have a swim," said the duck.  "Will you
come with us??

"No, no!" answered Bunny.  "I can not swim.  You did not teach me."

"Perhaps I could teach you this morning," said the duck.  "There is not
much water in the brook to-day."

"I don't want to learn to swim," answered Bunny, and he hopped off to
find Bobtail.

But he could not find Bobtail, and he could not find Billy.

So at last Bunny sat down under the oak tree to take a nap.

Mrs. Duck and all the little ducks waddled along the path until they
came to the brook.

It was just a very tiny brook, now.  It was really nothing but mud.

"Oh, dear me!" said Mrs. Duck "I wish it would rain to-day."

"Rain, rain, rain!" called Robin Redbreast.  "I wish it would rain."

"I think it will rain," said Mr. Green Frog.  "And I think it will rain
to-day."

[Illustration: "I think it will rain to-day."]

Mrs. Duck let the little ducks play in the muddy brook.

They pushed their flat bills into the mud to find something to eat.

Their little yellow feet were black with mud, but they liked it.

Mr. Sun looked down and smiled at them.  He smiled his brightest smile.

Then a cloud came and hid the sun.

A gentle wind began to blow over the tall grass in the field.

"Bow your heads!" the wind said to the flowers and grass.

Then the wind puffed out its cheeks and blew harder.

It rushed along to the woods.

"Bow your heads!" it said to the pine trees and the oak trees.

They bowed their heads and waved their branches to and fro.

The wind blew harder, and the clouds sailed faster and faster across
the sky.

"It is going to rain," said Mrs. Duck.

"Yes," called Robin Redbreast.  "It is going to rain.  I know it is.  I
must fly to the woods until the shower is over.

"Come, little ducks," said their mother.

"We must so back to the barn until the shower is over.  I think the
wind will blow very hard, and I do not like the wind."

So the robin flew to the woods, and the ducks went back to the barn.

Sammy Red Squirrel saw the shower coming, and he scampered home as fast
as he could go.

Billy and Bobtail were playing in their yard, when the wind rushed by
and called to them.

"Run in, little rabbits," said the wind.  "I am bringing a shower.  Run
in or you will get your fur coats wet."

So Billy and Bobtail hopped into the house and curled up to take a nap
until the shower was over.



II

The wind puffed out his cheeks and blew harder and harder.

The clouds sailed across the sky faster and faster.

It was almost as dark as night.

And Bunny slept on, under the big oak tree.

Patter, patter, patter! the rain drops fell on the oak leaves.

Easter and faster they fell.  In a few minutes the leaves were wet.

Then the water began to fall down on the ground at the foot of the tree.

One great big drop fell on Bunny's nose.  Then another fell on his ear.

He waked up with a start.

"What is the matter?" he said.  "What is the matter?"

He opened his eyes wide and then he knew what was the matter.

"Oh, dear me!" he said to himself.  "Robin Redbreast has her wish at
last.  It is raining hard."

Faster and faster the rain drops fell from the black clouds.

The ground was soon wet under the oak tree.

And Bunny was wet, too.

But he could not go home.  He knew better than to leave the oak tree
and skip out into the field.

So he curled himself up in a very tiny ball and waited for the shower
to be over.

It grew lighter and lighter.

The wind stopped blowing, and at last Mr. Sun peeped out from behind
the cloud.

He looked right down on Bunny, and laughed to see how he was rolled up
in such a tiny ball.

"Cheer up, cheer up!" sang Robin Redbreast.  "That was a fine rain.  I
am going to take a bath in that puddle of water."

Mr. Green Frog came out of his hole.

"Croak, croak!" he said.  "That was a fine rain.  I like to see the
water running in the brook again."

[Illustration: "Croak, croak!" said Mr. Green Frog.]

Bunny jumped up and shook himself.

He was just as wet as he could be.

His feet were wet.  His back was wet.  And his nice long ears were wet.

He jumped up and shook himself.  Then he started off toward home.

On his way he met Mrs. Duck and all the little ducks.

They were going to the brook to have a swim.

"That was a fine rain," Mrs. Duck called to Bunny.

"Just see how the flowers hold up their heads."

But Bunny did not look at the flowers.  He could not see why anything
liked to be wet.

"That was a fine rain," said Mrs. Duck, again.  "That was a fine rain."

"Perhaps it was," said Bunny.  "But I like best to have the sun shine."

And then, without saying another word, Bunny hopped off home.

Mrs. Duck and the little ducks went to the brook to have a swim in the
fresh water.

And Robin Redbreast took a bath in the puddle under the oak tree.




SAMMY'S FLYING MACHINE

I

Sammy Red Squirrel was sitting on the stone wall eating a nut.

"Caw, caw!" called Blacky Crow, as he flew over the field.

"Caw, caw, caw!" he called.  "What are you doing, Sammy?"

Sammy stopped eating the nut, and looked up to see who was talking to
him.

He saw Blacky Crow sailing round and round over his head.

"I am eating my breakfast," he answered.  "Would you like to have a nut
to eat, too?"

"Oh, no," answered Blacky Crow.  "I can find something better than that.

"I am going to the pasture now to get my breakfast."

Then Blacky Crow flapped his big wings and flew far, far away.

Sammy watched the crow fly over the tallest tree and out of sight.

"I wish I could fly," he said to himself.  "I know I could if I had
some wings."

Just then a flock of sparrows flew over head.

"Twitter, twitter!" they said.

"Twitter, twitter, twitter!"

Sammy watched the sparrows flying until they were out of sight.

"I know I could fly," he said to himself again, "if I had some wings.

"Perhaps I could make some wings," he thought.

Just then something hit Sammy on the head.

He looked up to see what it was, and there at his feet lay an oak leaf.

He looked up in the top of the tree.

West Wind flew by and shook the branches of the tree very gently.

And another leaf floated softly down to the ground beside its brother.

Sammy sat there watching the leaves for a few minutes.

Then he jumped up and clapped his hands.

"I know what I can do," he said.  "I can make some wings for myself out
of those oak leaves.

"I will ask all the other squirrels to come and watch me fly."

Sammy hunted on the ground until he found two very large oak leaves.

"I can hold them out with my front paws," he said.  "I think they will
look just like wings."

Sammy put the two leaves on the ground and covered them with a stone.

He was not going to let West Wind carry them away.

Then he scampered off to tell all the other squirrels what he was going
to do.

He told all the red squirrels first.

He told them he was going to fly from the big oak tree.

"If you wish to see me fly," he said, "you must be at the tree in a few
minutes."

All the red squirrels scampered off to get the best seats among the
branches of the oak tree.

Sammy saw Bobby Gray Squirrel and told him to ask all the gray
squirrels to come and see him fly.

Then Sammy found Bunny Rabbit.

When Bunny heard what Sammy was going to do, he wanted to try to fly,
too.

"You are much too large for my wings," said Sammy.

"You would have to go to Mr. Man's garden and ask him for some of the
leaves from the rhubarb plants."

Blacky Crow was flying over the field.  He heard Sammy tell Bunny that
he was going to fly.

"Ho, ho!" he laughed, "I should like to see Sammy fly with those
oak-leaf wings.

"I will fly to the oak tree this very minute."

As he flew over the meadow he saw the sparrows and told them where he
was going.

They wanted to go, too.

Every one wanted to go and watch Sammy fly.



II

When they were all seated, Sammy picked up the two leaves he had found
and skipped gaily up the tree.

He ran up the tree and out on one of the longest branches.

"Now, watch me!" he called to all his friends.

"See me fly just like a bird."

Sammy took one leaf in each of his front paws and held them out as far
as he could.

He stood on the very end of the branch for just one minute.

He saw that every one was watching him.

"You must flap your wings," called Blacky Crow.

"Hop off the branch," called one of the sparrows.

So Sammy flapped his wings, and then he hopped off the branch.

But, oh, dear me!  The wings would not hold Sammy up in the air.

Sammy forgot to hold his wings out straight and they hung down at his
side without a flutter.

And down to the ground Sammy fell.

[Illustration: Down to the ground Sammy fell.]

Bump! he came down at the foot of the oak tree.

He almost fell on top of Bunny Rabbit.

But Bunny saw him coming and jumped out of the way just in time.

Sammy lay very still where he had fallen.

All the squirrels ran down to see if he had hurt himself.

Bobby Gray Squirrel ran to pick the fallen bird up from the ground.

Sammy had given his nose such a bump that it was all black and blue.

He had hurt his paw.  And his make-believe wings were all crushed and
broken.

Sammy rubbed his nose and then he looked at his friends.

"I don't believe oak leaves make good wings," he said.

"No," said the tiniest sparrow, "the best wings are made of feathers."

"Caw, caw!" said Blacky Crow.  "My wings are made of feathers.  See how
I can fly."

Then Blacky Crow flapped his big wings and flew away.

The sparrows flew away, too.

All the squirrels scampered off to hunt for nuts.

And the rabbits went back to their home to take a nap.

Sammy was left sitting alone on the old stone wall.

Every few minutes he rubbed his poor little nose.

And as he rubbed his nose he thought:

"Flying may be fun for birds, and swimming may be fun for ducks.

"But running and jumping among the branches of the big oak tree is more
fun for squirrels."




THE CABBAGE PATCH

I

"Oh, dear me!" said Billy.  "I am so hungry.  I wish I could find
something good to eat."

"I know where there is a big cabbage patch," said Bunny.

"Where, where?" asked Billy.

"Where, where?" asked Bobtail.

"Follow me," said Bunny, "and I will show you."

"Is it far?" asked Billy.

"No," said Bunny.  "It is not very far,--just down in Mr. Man's garden."

"I think I will stay here," said Billy.  "This clover is very good."

So Billy stayed and ate the clover, but Bobtail and Bunny hopped off
down the road.

They hopped along the road until they came to Mr. Man's barn.

Then they stopped to listen.

Bunny sat up straight and held up his long ears.

Bobtail sat up straight and held up his long ears.

They listened and listened, but they did not hear a sound.

"I think Jip is asleep in the house," said Bunny.

"I think Mr. Man is eating his dinner," said Bobtail.

"Let's hurry," said Bunny.  "We can reach the garden without any one
seeing us, I am sure."

So the two little rabbits laid their ears down on their heads and
hopped away.

They hopped behind the barn.

Mr. Rooster saw them coming.

"Cock-a-doodle-doo!" he said.  "Who are you?  Where are you going in
such a hurry?"

"We are going to the garden to get our dinner," said Bunny.

"Mr. Man never lets me go to the garden," said Mr. Rooster.

"Mr. Man never lets me go to the garden if he knows about it," laughed
Bunny.

"Cock-a-doodle-doo!" said the rooster, as he flapped his wings and flew
up on the fence.

"Please do not make so much noise," begged Bobtail.  "Mr. Man will hear
you and come out to see what is the matter."

But the rooster just flapped his big wings and crowed again.

"Come," said Bunny.  "This is no place for us.

"Let's hop into the garden and get some cabbage."



II

The two rabbits hopped off across the yard and into the garden.

There they found the biggest cabbages they had ever seen.

There were rows and rows of them.

They were great big green cabbages.  How good they did look to the
hungry little rabbits!

"I aim going to eat this one," said Bunny.  And he stopped at a big,
big cabbage at the end of one long row.

Bobtail picked out a big one for himself and began to nibble the sweet
leaves.

Nibble, nibble, nibble!  Not a word did the little rabbits speak.

They could not talk.  They were so busy eating that they could not say
a word.

Nibble, nibble, nibble!  How still it was in the garden!

Bunny heard the bees humming as they flew among the flowers.

Once Blacky Crow flew over and called to the rabbits.

But he did not fly down to the garden.  There was nothing there for him
to eat, now.

He liked the corn when it had just peeped out of the ground.

Then it was tender and sweet, and he often pulled it up for his dinner.

Nibble, nibble, nibble!  How still it was everywhere.

Then all at once there was a noise.

It was a noise the rabbits knew too well.

"Bow-wow-wow!" said Jip, as he bounded across the field.

"Bow-wow-wow!  I think some one is in my master's garden."

Bunny and Bobtail knew who was coming.  They did not have to wait and
see.

Off through the garden they hopped.

They hopped so fast that they were soon out of sight.

But Jip knew where they had gone, and he ran after them, barking louder
and louder at every step.

"Oh, dear me!" cried Bobtail.  "What shall we do?  Jip will catch us
before we reach home."

"Follow me," said Bunny, "I know where there is a hole big enough for
both of us to hide."

So Bobtail followed Bunny.

They hopped across the field and into the woods.

"Bow-wow-wow!" said Jip.  "I am going to catch you this time."

And then, all at once, Jip could not see the rabbits anywhere.

They had hopped into a hole under the big rock at the foot of the oak
tree.

They hopped into the hole and then they were safe.

Jip could not reach them.

He sat down beside the hole to wait until they came out, but they were
too wise to come out.



III

Jip waited and waited, and the rabbits waited and waited, too.

At last Jip grew tired of watching the hole and ran off home.

Then the two rabbits knew it was safe for them to go home, too.

Bunny put his nose out and looked around.

There was no one in sight.

"I am going now," he said to Bobtail.  "Jip has gone away."

And then Bunny started to get out of the hole.

He put out his head, but he could not get any farther.

"What is the matter?  What are you waiting for?  Is Jip coming back?"
asked Bobtail.

But Bunny did not answer.  He just kept on wiggling and twisting.

He twisted and wiggled, twisted and wiggled.  But he could not get out
of that hole.

At last he pulled his head back through the hole.  Then he sat down and
looked at Bobtail.

"What shall we do?" he said.  "The hole has grown small since we came
through it."

"Perhaps I can get out," said Bobtail.  "Let me try."

So Bobtail put his head out and then he hopped out the rest of the way.

"I'm out," he called to Bunny.  "You can get out, I am sure."

Bobtail hopped off home leaving Bunny to get out the best way he could.

Of course Bunny got out; but he scratched his poor little nose and he
scratched his back.

He hurt his long ears and he hurt his foot.

But he did get out at last.

And when he was safe on the outside of the hole he turned around and
looked at it.

"I'll never go in there again," he said as he rubbed his nose.

"I thought it was a big hole, but I must be bigger than the hole."

Then Bunny hopped off home.

Mother Rabbit was standing at the door watching for him.

Bobtail and Billy were watching, too.

"How did you get out of the hole?" they asked.

"This is the way I got out," said Bunny, and he pointed to his poor
little scratched nose.

When Mother Rabbit saw that Bunny had hurt himself she took him into
the house.

She gave him some hot cabbage soup.

Then she wrapped his nose up in flannel and made him stay in bed a
whole day until he was all well again.

[Illustration: She wrapped his nose up in flannel.]




THE WHITE RABBIT

I

It was a warm summer day.

Bunny and Billy were over in the meadow eating clover.

Mother Rabbit and Bobtail were in the garden eating cabbage.

Billy was fond of cabbage, too.  But the garden was far away, across
the field and over the other side of the road.

So Billy ate clover in the meadow.

Bunny had eaten cabbage the day before.  So he ate clover in the meadow
with Billy.

The two little rabbits nibbled at the tender leaves.

"I have had enough to last me all day," said Bunny.  "Now let's go and
play."

"Oh, no!" said Billy.  "I am going home and take a nap."

"Oh, do come and play with me," said Bunny.

But Billy only shook his head and hopped off toward home.

Bunny looked around to see if there was any one to play with.

He could not see any of his friends.

"I think I will go over to the garden and find mother and Bobtail," he
said to himself.

Now when Bunny thought of anything he always did it the very next
minute.

So he hopped off as fast he could go.

He hopped across the field and across the road.

When he came to the barn he stopped to see if Mr. Man or Jip were
anywhere in sight.

"Cock-a-doodle-doo!" called the rooster, who was sitting on the fence.

[Illustration: "Cock-a-doodle-doo!" called the rooster.]

"Where are you going so fast this bright day?"

"I am going to the garden again," said Bunny.  "Mother and Bobtail are
there eating cabbage."

Bunny hopped along past the hen-yard fence, and into the orchard.

All at once he stopped.  He saw something in the grass ahead of him.

It was white and round and furry.  And it had two long ears just like
his own.

Bunny stood very still and looked and looked.

"That must be a snow rabbit," he said to himself.

"But I never saw a snow rabbit in the summer.  I am sure this hot sun
would melt the snow."

Just then the white rabbit saw Bunny.

"Who are you?" he asked.  "I never saw you before."

"I never saw you," said Bunny.  "Where did you come from?"

"I live in a little house near the barn," said the white rabbit.

"Jack left the gate open this morning when he fed me, and so I thought
I would take a walk."

"Do you like to live in a little house?" asked Bunny.

"Oh, yes," answered the white rabbit.  "I always have something to eat
and I am never cold.

"And when Jack forgets to close the gate, I have a good play in the
field."

"I live in the woods," said Bunny.  "My door is never closed, and I can
run out any time I wish.

"But sometimes I am hungry, and sometimes I am cold."

"Come and live with me," said the white rabbit.  "There is room enough
in my house for two."

Now Bunny knew he would not like to live in a house all the time, but
he thought he might go and visit the white rabbit.

So Bunny and Whitie, as Bunny called him, hopped off toward the barn.

"That is my home," said the white rabbit, and he pointed to a little
house under the apple tree.

There was a yard in front of the house.  And there was a fence around
the yard,--a fence with a gate that could be shut and locked.

Bunny saw the house and he hopped along after Whitie.

But he was frightened.  He had never been so near the barn before.

What if Mr. Man or Jip should see him.



II

At last they reached Whitie's house and the two little rabbits hopped
through the gate.

"Oh, see these cabbage leaves," said Whitie.  "Jack left them here for
my dinner."

But Bunny did not look at the cabbage leaves, for just at that moment
he heard Jip barking.

And then he heard Jack talking to the dog.

Poor Bunny's heart began to beat very fast.

"What shall I do?  What shall I do?" he said.

"Jack and Jip will not hurt you," said Whitie.  "I think Jack is coming
to close the gate."

Bunny hid himself in one corner of the house and held his breath for
fear Jack would see him.

"Why, Whitie!" Bunny heard Jack say, "I left your gate open this
morning.  I must close it now or you will be taking a walk in the
garden."

Jack closed the gate, and Bunny was caught.

When Jack had gone away, Whitie called to Bunny to come out in the yard.

"Come and eat some of these good cabbage leaves," he said.

But Bunny could not eat.  He could only sit and look at the closed gate.

"I want to go home," he said to Whitie.  "I don't like to stay in this
yard all the time."

"But you will never be hungry here," said Whitie.  "Come and eat
something now."

Bunny was not hungry.  He could not eat.

All day long he sat in the house.

He wondered what Bobtail and Billy were doing.

He wondered if Mother Rabbit was hunting for him.

Just before dark he heard Jack coming to see Whitie again.

He did not hear Jip barking.

"Perhaps Jack is alone," thou| Bunny.  "If he is I think I can get
away."

He sat very still and listened.

Then he peeped out and saw Jack coming across the grass.

He was all alone.  The dog was not running along beside him.

Bunny turned around and looked at Whitie.

"Good-by," he said.  "I am going to hop out when Jack opens the gate.

"You have a very good home here.  But I like my home in the woods much
better.

"Sometime when you run away come and see me."

Just then Jack opened the gate and out jumped Bunny!  Jack was so
frightened that he dropped Whitie's supper on the ground.

He looked around to see what had flashed by him so quickly.

But Bunny was out of sight!

He did not stop or look around until he was safe in his own home.

"Where have you been?" asked Mother Rabbit.  "I thought you were lost."

"I thought so, too," said Bunny.

"I went to visit the white rabbit who lives in a little house under the
apple tree.

"And then Jack came and shut the gate and I could not get away."

"Oh, Bunny, Bunny!" said Mother Rabbit.  "I thought you were too wise
to get caught in a trap."

"I am now," Bunny answered, and he ran out to have a game of tag with
Billy and Bobtail.




TEDDY BEAR

I

Teddy Bear lay on the grass in the meadow.

He lay there all day and he lay there all night.

Baby May had dropped him there and forgotten all about him.

So the little brown bear lay on the soft grass in the meadow.

Blacky Crow flew over the meadow and called to the bear.

"Caw, caw!" he said.  "What are you doing here?"

"I thought you liked to stay in the playroom with the rest of the toys."

Of course Teddy did like to stay in the playroom.

But if May dropped him in the meadow how could he get back to the house?

Mrs. Duck and all the little ducks waddled along the path that led to
the brook.

"Quack, quack!" said Mrs. Duck.  "Look here, look here!  Where did you
come from?  What are you doing in this meadow?"

[Illustration: "Quack, quack!  Where did _you_ come from?"]

Teddy stared at the duck with his little black eyes, but he did not say
a word.

Perhaps he did not like to tell her that May had forgotten all about
her little playmate.

"Quack, quack!" said Mrs. Duck.  "I teach my children to speak when
they are spoken to."

Teddy just stared and stared, but he did not say a word.

"Very well," said Mrs. Duck, "I will go to the pond and see Mr. Green
Frog.

"I will ask him if he knows who you are."

So off to the pond waddled Mrs. Duck, and all her children waddled
after her.

"Bow-wow!" barked Jip as he ran through the meadow.

"I am trying to find some one to play with me.

"I wish I could find Bunny Rabbit.  I should like to have a game of
chase with him."

Just then Jip saw Teddy Bear.

"Bow-wow-wow!" he said.  "What are you doing in this meadow?

"I thought you lived in the playroom."

Teddy Bear stared at Jip with his little black eyes, but he did not say
a word.

I am sure he wished the dog would run away and not talk to him.

But Jip wanted to play.  He thought it was fun to play with Teddy.

It was fun to pick him up and toss him into the air.

It was fun to hide him where May could not find him.

Jip picked Teddy up in his mouth and ran along through the meadow.

He ran through the meadow and into the woods.

"Bow-wow, bow-wow!" he said.

When Jip opened his mouth to bark, Teddy hopped out and fell to the
ground.

Jip picked him up again.  He tossed him up in the air and then caught
him in his mouth.

He shook him, and shook him, but Teddy did not say a word.

Then Jip started along the path in the woods.

"I am going to hide Teddy where May will never find him," he said to
himself.

"Then I can have him to play with every day."

But the next minute Jip forgot all about Teddy Bear, because he saw
Bobby Gray Squirrel.

Bobby Gray Squirrel wag skipping over the ground hunting for nuts.

Jip liked to play tag with Bobby, so he dropped Teddy Bear and ran
after the little gray squirrel.

But Bobby saw the dog coming and skipped up into the oak tree.

He sat down on the lowest branch and began to scold Jip.

"Chatter, chatter, chatter!" he said.  "Why did you run after me?  I
had just found a nut for my breakfast."

"Bow-wow!" said Jip.  "Come down out of that tree and play chase with
me."

But Bobby would not come down and so at last Jip ran away home.

He forgot about Teddy and left him under the tree.

When Jip had run away, Bobby came down out of the tree.

He saw Teddy and ran over to speak to him.

"Good-morning," Bobby said to the little brown bear.  "What are you
doing under this tree?"

Teddy stared at the squirrel with his little black eyes, but he did not
say a word.

"My mother taught me to speak when I am spoken to," said Bobby.

But Teddy did not speak, and so at last Bobby ran away and left him.



II

Oh, Teddy was so lonely!

He wished that he were back in the playroom with the other toys.

He thought of Jack-in-the-box, and the bright tin soldiers.

He thought of the new automobile and of all the pretty dolls.

Then at last he fell asleep and dreamed that he was back in the
playroom.

All at once some one took him by the arm.

"Wake up and talk to me," said Bunny Rabbit.  "I want some one to play
with me."

Teddy stared at Bunny with his little black eyes, but he did not say a
word.

Bunny shook him and shook him.

"Now will you speak to me?" he said.

But Teddy Bear would not open his mouth.

"Well, well," said Bunny.  "I don't like to talk to you.  I will find
some other playmate."

"Bow-wow, bow-wow!" said Jip.  "I will play with you, Bunny."

But when Bunny heard Jip coming along the path he forgot all about
playing.

He hopped off down the path as fast as he could go.

He did not look around once to see where the dog had gone.

Jack came along the path with Jip.  When he came to the tree he saw
Teddy Bear lying on the ground.

"Why, Teddy," he said, "how did you get away out here all alone?"

Teddy stared at Jack with his little black eyes, but he did not say a
word.

"Bow-wow, bow-wow!" barked Jip.  He was trying to tell Jack that he put
Teddy under the tree.

But Jack did not listen.

He just picked Teddy up in his arms and carried him back to the house.

He took the little brown bear up to the playroom.

May was sitting on the floor playing with her dolls.

Teddy was so happy to get back home that he jumped out of Jack's arms.

"Oh, oh!" cried May.  "You dropped poor Teddy Bear."

She picked Teddy up and gave him a great bear hug.

"Why did you run away from me?" she asked.

Teddy stared at May with his little black eyes, but he did not say a
word.

He just stared at everything in the playroom, and thought of the story
he would tell his friends about his day in the woods.




BOBBY'S PARTY.

I

Bang, bang, bang!

Snap, snap, snap!

All day long Bobby Gray Squirrel hid in his nest because he did not
like the noise.

He poked his nose out once or twice to see what was the matter.

But each time he heard a loud bang, snap!

Then he jumped back in his nest to hide.

All day long he lay there and listened.  And all day long the children
played with their fire-crackers.

Fourth of July is fun for boys and girls.

But it is not so much fun for rabbits and squirrels.

At last it was quiet.

Bobby had not heard a sound for a long time.

So he peeped out of his door once more.

The sun was not shining now.  The big round moon was looking down to
see if all the children were in bed.

He was looking to see if all the rabbits and squirrels were in bed, too.

Bobby saw the moon and then he skipped back into his house once more.

"Oh, dear me!" he said to himself.  "I am hungry.  But I must wait
until the sun comes up again.

"I am afraid I could not find anything to eat by the light of the moon."

Bobby went to sleep and the next time he opened his eyes it was morning.

He jumped up and ran out of doors.

He ran down the branch of the oak tree and off through the woods.

"Good-morning," Bunny called to him, as he ran past the three rabbits
who were eating clover for breakfast.

"This is a good morning," said Bobby.  "It is so still and quiet."

Bobby ran on and on.

Every few minutes he stopped to hunt for some hidden nut.

But he could not find many.

At last he said to himself, "I am going to the orchard to get an apple.

"I like to eat the seeds.  I might find an apple on one of the trees."

Bobby skipped through the woods and across the field.

He came to the stone wall that ran along one side of the road.

Bobby jumped up on the highest stone to look around and see if any one
were in sight.

He looked up the road, and he looked down the road.  But no one was in
sight.

He jumped down from the wall, and then he stood still.

Right at his feet wag a paper bag.

And the bag smelled so good that the little squirrel stopped to take
another sniff.

"That smells like peanuts," Bobby said to himself.

"I will make a hole in the bag and see what is inside."

Bobby took hold of the bag with his sharp little teeth and tore a big
round hole.

He tore a hole big enough to put his paw through.

And then he was just like little Jack Horner.

    He put in his thumb
    And pulled out a plum,

And said, "What a big squirrel am I."

He pulled out the kind of plum he liked best of all.  It was a peanut.

He pulled out one peanut, and then he pulled out another.

"This bag is full of peanuts," he said to himself.  "There are so many
here I can never eat them all."

[Illustration: "This bag is full of peanuts."]

"I know what I can do.  I can have a party."

Now squirrels must like to have parties just as well as little boys and
girls.

Because when Bobby thought of the party he jumped up and down and
clapped his hands.

Then he started off to invite all the other gray squirrels.

But he stopped when he reached the top of the wall.

He had just thought that some one might come while he was away and find
the peanuts.

"I will hide them in the wall," he said to himself.  "Then they will be
out of sight."

So Bobby jumped down again and began to carry the nuts to a safe place.

It took so long, and Bobby worked so hard that he had to go back home
to take a nap when he had finished.



II

Bobby Gray Squirrel slept and slept.

But Sammy Red Squirrel was not asleep.

He had been wide awake all day.

He had seen Bobby hiding the peanuts in the old stone wall.

He was sitting up in the maple tree watching him all the time.

"I wonder what Bobby is hiding all those nuts for," he said to himself.

"I think I will wait here and see what he is going to do."

So for a long time Sammy sat still in the maple tree watching Bobby
work.

When the last nut was hidden Bobby skipped off toward home.

"Now is my chance," said Sammy.  "I am going to play a trick on Bobby."

Sammy skipped down the tree and ran along the wall to the place where
the nuts were hidden.

He took the nuts out of their hiding place and carried them to a hole
behind the big rock.

It took a long time to do it, but Sammy liked to play tricks.

Back and forth he ran until the very last nut was stored away in the
new hiding place.

Then he skipped around to tell the red squirrels about the joke he had
played on Bobby Gray Squirrel.

"Run to the maple tree near the stone wall," said Sammy.  "You will see
what Bobby does when he finds his nuts are gone."

So the red squirrels all ran to the maple tree to watch for the gray
squirrels to come to the party.

At last Bobby waked up.  And the minute he opened his eyes he thought
of the peanuts.

He skipped down the tree and ran to tell his friends about the party.

"Meet me at the old stone wall," he said.  "That is where I am going to
have my party."

So the gray squirrels all ran along to the stone wall.

The red squirrels were in the maple tree, but the gray squirrels did
not see them.

As soon as Bobby came to the stone wall all his friends ran to meet him.

"Follow me," said Bobby.  "I will show you the biggest pile of peanuts
you ever saw."

So the gray squirrels skipped along after Bobby.

But when they came to the storehouse they all stopped and looked at the
hole.

Not one peanut could they see.

"I wonder who found my nuts," said Bobby.  "I thought I had put them
where they could not be found."

The gray squirrels sat down in a row and looked very sad.

Just then they heard a sound up in the maple tree.

They looked up and saw all the red squirrels laughing.

"Ho, ho, ho!" Sammy was laughing.  "That was a good joke.  I took your
nuts and hid them in another hole."

"Ho, ho, ho!" all the red squirrels were laughing.

They all laughed again, and then Sammy said, "I will give a peanut
party.  Follow me."

Sammy led the red squirrels and the gray squirrels to the place where
he had hidden the nuts.

And what a party they had!

They ate all the nuts they wanted, and then carried some home for
dinner the next day.

[Illustration: They ate all the nuts they wanted.]



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BUNNY RABBIT'S DIARY***


******* This file should be named 16982.txt or 16982.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/6/9/8/16982



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.net/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.net/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

