The Project Gutenberg eBook, Ole Mammy's Torment, by Annie Fellows
Johnston, Illustrated by Mary G. Johnston and Amy M. Sacker


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Ole Mammy's Torment


Author: Annie Fellows Johnston



Release Date: January 12, 2006  [eBook #17497]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OLE MAMMY'S TORMENT***


E-text prepared by David Garcia, Christine D., and the Project Gutenberg
Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net/) from page
images generously made available by the Kentuckiana Digital Library
(http://kdl.kyvl.org/)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 17497-h.htm or 17497-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/7/4/9/17497/17497-h/17497-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.net/dirs/1/7/4/9/17497/17497-h.zip)

      Images of the original pages are available through the Electronic
      Text Collection of the Kentuckiana Digital Library. See
      http://kdl.kyvl.org/cgi/t/text/text-idx?c=kyetexts;cc=kyetexts;xc=1&idno=B92-247-31689486&view=toc


Transcriber's note:
   Italics indicated by _.
   Bold indicated by =.
   Small Caps indicated by ALL CAPS.
   See other notes at end of file





OLE MAMMY'S TORMENT


     *     *     *     *     *     *     *


Works of
ANNIE FELLOWS JOHNSTON


  =The Little Colonel Series=

  (_Trade Mark, Reg. U.S. Pat. Of._)

  Each one vol., large 12mo, cloth, illustrated

  The Little Colonel Stories                             $1.50
    (Containing in one volume the three stories, "The
    Little Colonel," "The Giant Scissors," and "Two
    Little Knights of Kentucky.")

  The Little Colonel's House Party                        1.50
  The Little Colonel's Holidays                           1.50
  The Little Colonel's Hero                               1.50
  The Little Colonel at Boarding-School                   1.50
  The Little Colonel in Arizona                           1.50
  The Little Colonel's Christmas Vacation                 1.50
  The Little Colonel: Maid of Honor                       1.50
  The Little Colonel's Knight Comes Riding                1.50
  Mary Ware: The Little Colonel's Chum                    1.50
    The above 10 vols., _boxed_                          15.00
    _In Preparation_: A new "Little Colonel" Book.

                          *       *       *

  The Little Colonel Good Times Book                      1.50


                   =Illustrated Holiday Editions=

  Each one vol., small quarto, cloth, illustrated, and printed in
                              colour

  The Little Colonel                                     $1.25
  The Giant Scissors                                      1.25
  Two Little Knights of Kentucky                          1.25
  Big Brother                                             1.25

                        =Cosy Corner Series=
            Each one vol., thin 12mo, cloth, illustrated

  The Little Colonel                                      $.50
  The Giant Scissors                                       .50
  Two Little Knights of Kentucky                           .50
  Big Brother                                              .50
  Ole Mammy's Torment                                      .50
  The Story of Dago                                        .50
  Cicely                                                   .50
  Aunt 'Liza's Hero                                        .50
  The Quilt that Jack Built                                .50
  Flip's "Islands of Providence"                           .50
  Mildred's Inheritance                                    .50

                           =Other Books=

  Joel: A Boy of Galilee                                 $1.50
  In the Desert of Waiting                                 .50
  The Three Weavers                                        .50
  Keeping Tryst                                            .50
  The Legend of the Bleeding Heart                         .50
  The Rescue of the Princess Winsome                       .50
  The Jester's Sword                                       .50
  Asa Holmes                                              1.00
  Songs Ysame (Poems, with Albion Fellows Bacon)          1.00

                          *       *       *

                       L.C. PAGE & COMPANY
  53 Beacon Street                               Boston, Mass.


     *     *     *     *     *     *     *



[Illustration: Bud and Ivy]




OLE MAMMY'S TORMENT

by

ANNIE FELLOWS JOHNSTON

Illustrated by Mary G. Johnston and Amy M. Sacker







[Illustration: Publisher's crest]



Boston
L. C. Page and Company
(Incorporated)
Publishers
_Copyright, 1897_
by L. C. Page and Company
(Incorporated)
Thirteenth Impression, February, 1907
Fourteenth Impression, March, 1909
Fifteenth Impression, August, 1910
=Colonial Press:=
Electrotyped and Printed by C.H. Simonds & Co.
Boston, Mass., U.S.A.




                           TO
                 TWO TORMENTS WHOM I KNOW



[Illustration: Illustrations]




ILLUSTRATIONS


                                                PAGE
  BUD AND IVY                         _Frontispiece_

  JOHN JAY                                         2

  "'WOT WE ALL GWINE DO NOW?'"                     7

  MARS' NAT                                       29

  "A GROUP OF PRETTY GIRLS SAT ON THE PORCH"      37

  "FILLED BOTH HIS HANDS"                         41

  UNDER THE APPLE-TREE                            52

  UNCLE BILLY                                     65

  "THE GANDERS HAD CHASED HIM AROUND"             76

  "GEORGE CAME OUT AND LOCKED THE DOOR"           93

  "SAT ALONE BY THE CHURCH STEPS"                111

[Illustration: Cabin]




OLE MAMMY'S TORMENT.

CHAPTER I.


Uncle Billy rested his axe on the log he was chopping, and turned his
grizzly old head to one side, listening intently. A confusion of sounds
came from the little cabin across the road. It was a dilapidated negro
cabin, with its roof awry and the weather-boarding off in great patches;
still, it was a place of interest to Uncle Billy. His sister lived there
with three orphan grandchildren.

Leaning heavily on his axe-handle, he thrust out his under lip, and
rolled his eyes in the direction of the uproar. A broad grin spread over
his wrinkled black face as he heard the rapid spank of a shingle, the
scolding tones of an angry voice, and a prolonged howl.

"John Jay an' he gran'mammy 'peah to be havin' a right sma't difference
of opinion togethah this mawnin'," he chuckled.

He shaded his eyes with his stiff, crooked fingers for a better view. A
pair of nimble black legs skipped back and forth across the open
doorway, in a vain attempt to dodge the descending shingle, while a
clatter of falling tinware followed old Mammy's portly figure, as she
made awkward but surprising turns in her wrathful circuit of the crowded
room.

[Illustration: John Jay]

"Ow! I'll be good! I'll be good! Oh, Mammy, don't! You'se a-killin' me!"
came in a high shriek.

Then there was a sudden dash for the cabin door, and an eight-year-old
colored boy scurried down the path like a little wild rabbit, as fast as
his bare feet could carry him. The noise ended as suddenly as it had
begun; so suddenly, indeed, that the silence seemed intense, although
the air was full of all the low twitterings and soft spring sounds that
come with the early days of April.

Uncle Billy stood chuckling over the boy's escape. The situation had
been made clear to him by the angry exclamations he had just overheard.
John Jay, left in charge of the weekly washing, flapping on the line,
had been unfaithful to his trust. A neighbor's goat had taken advantage
of his absence to chew up a pillowcase and two aprons.

Really, the child was not so much to blame. It was the fault of the
fish-pond, sparkling below the hill. But old Mammy couldn't understand
that. She had never been a boy, with the water tempting her to come and
angle for its shining minnows; with the budding willows beckoning her,
and the warm winds luring her on. But Uncle Billy understood, and felt
with a sympathetic tingle in every rheumatic old joint, that it was a
temptation beyond the strength of any boy living to resist.

His chuckling suddenly stopped as the old woman appeared in the doorway.
He fell to chopping again with such vigor that the chips flew wildly in
all directions. He knew from the way that her broad feet slapped along
the beaten path that she was still angry, and he thought it safest to
take no notice of her, beyond a cheery "Good mawnin', sis' Sheba."

"Huh! Not much good about it that I can see!" was her gloomy reply.
Lowering the basket she carried from her head to a fence-post, she began
the story of her grievances. It was an old story to Uncle Billy,
somewhat on the order of "The house that Jack built;" for, after telling
John Jay's latest pranks, she always repeated the long line of misdeeds
of which he had been guilty since the first day he had found a home
under her sagging rooftree.

Usually she found a sympathetic listener in Uncle Billy, but this
morning the only comfort he offered was an old plantation proverb,
spoken with brotherly frankness.

"Well, sis' Sheba, I 'low it'll be good for you in the long run.
'Troubles is seasonin'. 'Simmons ain't good twel dey er fros'bit,' you
know."

He stole a sidelong glance at her from under his bushy eyebrows, to see
the effect of his remark. She tossed her head defiantly. "I 'low if the
choice was left to the 'simmon or you eithah, brer Billy, you'd both
take the greenness an' the puckah befo' the fros'bite every time." Then
a tone of complaint trembled in her voice.

"I might a needed chastenin' in my youth, I don't 'spute that; but why
should I now, a trim'lin' on the aidge of the tomb, almos', have to put
up with that limb of a John Jay? If my poah Ellen knew what a tawment
her boy is to her ole mammy, I know she couldn't rest easy in her
grave."

"John Jay, he don't mean to be bad," remarked Uncle Billy soothingly.
"It's jus' 'cause he's so young an' onthinkin'. An' aftah all, it ain't
what he _does_. It's mo' like what the white folks say in they church up
on the hill. 'I have lef' undone the things what I ought to 'uv done.'"

Doubled up out of sight, behind the bushes that lined the roadside
ditch, John Jay held his breath and listened. When the ringing strokes
of the axe began again, he ventured to poke out his woolly head until
the whites of his eyes were visible. Sheba was trudging down the road
with her basket on her head, to the place where she always washed on
Tuesdays, she was far enough on her way now to make it safe for him to
come out of hiding.

The tears had dried on the boy's long curling lashes, but his bare legs
still smarted from the blows of the shingle, as he climbed slowly out of
the bushes and started back to the cabin.

"Hey, Bud! Come on, Ivy!" he called cheerfully. Nobody answered. It was
a part of the programme, whenever John Jay was punished, for the little
brother and sister to run and hide under the back-door step. There they
cowered, with covered heads, until the danger was over. Old Sheba had
never frowned on the four-year-old Bud, or baby Ivy, but they scuttled
out of sight like frightened mice at the first signal of her gathering
wrath.

Ivy lay still with her thumb in her mouth, but Bud began solemnly
crawling out from between the steps. Everything that Bud did seemed
solemn. Even his smiles were slow-spreading and dignified. Some people
called him Judge; but John Jay, wise in the negro lore of their
neighborhood Uncle Remus, called him "Brer Tarrypin" for good reasons of
his own.

"Wot we all gwine do now?" drawled Bud, with a turtle-like stretch of
his little round head as he peered through the steps.

[Illustration: 'Wot we all gwine do now?']

John Jay scanned the horizon on all sides, and thoughtfully rubbed his
ear. His quick eyes saw unlimited possibilities for enjoyment, where
older sight would have found but a dreary outlook; but older sight is
always on a strain for the birds in the bush. It is never satisfied with
the one in the hand. Older sight would have seen only a poor shanty set
in a patch of weeds and briers, and a narrow path straggling down to
the dust of the public road. But the outlook was satisfactory to John
Jay. So was it to the neighbor's goat, standing motionless in the warm
sunshine, with its eyes cast in the direction of a newly-made garden. So
was it to the brood of little yellow goslings, waddling after their
mother. They were out of their shells, and the world was wide.

Added to this same feeling of general contentment with his lot, John Jay
had the peace that came from the certainty that, no matter what he might
do, punishment could not possibly overtake him before nightfall. His
grandmother was always late coming home on Tuesday.

"Wot we all gwine do now?" repeated Bud.

John Jay caught at the low branch of the apple-tree to which the
clothes-line was tied, and drew himself slowly up. He did not reply
until he had turned himself over the limb several times, and hung head
downward by the knees.

"Go snake huntin', I reckon."

"But Mammy said not to take Ivy in the briah-patch again," said Bud
solemnly.

"That's so," exclaimed John Jay, "an' shingle say so too," he added,
with a grin, for his legs still smarted. Loosening the grip of his
knees on the apple-bough, he turned a summersault backward and landed on
his feet as lightly as a cat.

"Ivy'll go to sleep aftah dinnah," suggested Bud. "She always do." It
seemed a long time to wait until then, but with the remembrance of his
last punishment still warm in mind and body, John Jay knew better than
to take his little sister to the forbidden briar-patch.

"Well, we can dig a lot of fishin' worms," he decided, "an' put 'em in
those tomato cans undah the ash-hoppah. Then we'll make us a mud oven
an' roast us some duck aigs. Nobody but me knows where the nest is."

Bud's eyes shone. The prospect was an inviting one.

Most of the morning passed quickly, but the last half-hour was spent in
impatiently waiting for their dinner. They knew it was spread out under
a newspaper on the rickety old table, but they had strict orders not to
touch it until Aunt Susan sounded her signal for Uncle Billy. So they
sat watching the house across the road.

"Now it's time!" cried Bud excitedly. "I see Aunt Susan goin' around the
end of the house with her spoon."

An old cross-cut saw hung by one handle from a peg in the stick chimney.
As she beat upon it now with a long, rusty iron spoon, the din that
filled the surrounding air was worse than any made by the noisiest gong
ever beaten before a railroad restaurant. Uncle Billy, hoeing in a
distant field, gave an answering whoop, and waved his old hat.

The children raced into the house and tore the newspaper from the table.
Under it were three cold boiled potatoes, a dish of salt, a cup of
molasses, and a big pone of corn-bread. As head of the family, John Jay
divided everything but the salt exactly into thirds, and wasted no time
in ceremonies before beginning. As soon as the last crumb was finished
he spread an old quilt in front of the fireplace, where the embers,
though covered deep in ashes, still kept the hearth warm.

No coaxing was needed to induce Ivy to lie down. Even if she had not
been tired and sleepy she would have obeyed. John Jay's word was law in
his grandmother's absence. Then he sat down on the doorstep and waited
for her to go to sleep.

"If she wakes up and gets out on the road while we're gone, won't I
catch it, though!" he exclaimed to Bud in an undertone.

"Shet the doah," suggested Bud.

"No, she'd sut'n'ly get into some devilmint if she was shet in by
herself," he answered.

"How oft the sight of means to do ill deeds makes ill deeds done!" John
Jay's roving eyes fell on a broken teacup on the window-sill, that Mammy
kept as a catch-all for stray buttons and bits of twine. He remembered
having seen some rusty tacks among the odds and ends. A loose brickbat
stuck up suggestively from the sunken hearth. The idea had not much
sooner popped into his head than the deed was done. Bending over
breathlessly to make sure that the unsuspecting Ivy was asleep, he
nailed her little pink dress to the floor with a row of rusty tacks.
Then cautiously replacing the bit of broken brick, he made for the door,
upsetting Bud in his hasty leave-taking.

Over in the briar-patch, out of sight of the house, two happy little
darkeys played all the afternoon. They beat the ground with the stout
clubs they carried. They pried up logs in search of snakes. They
whooped, they sang, they whistled. They rolled over and over each
other, giggling as they wrestled, in the sheer delight of being alive on
such a day. When they finally killed a harmless little chicken-snake, no
prince of the royal blood, hunting tigers in Indian jungles, could have
been prouder of his striped trophies than they were of theirs.

Meanwhile Ivy slept peacefully on, one little hand sticking to her
plump, molasses-smeared cheek, the other holding fast to her headless
doll. Beside her on the floor lay a tattered picture-book, a big bottle
half full of red shelled corn, and John Jay's most precious treasure, a
toy watch that could be endlessly wound up. He had heaped them all
beside her, hoping they would keep her occupied until his return, in
case she should waken earlier than usual.

The sun was well on its way to bed when the little hunters shouldered
their clubs, with a snake dangling from each one, and started for the
cabin.

"My! I didn't know it was so late!" exclaimed John Jay ruefully, as they
met a long procession of home-going cows. "Ain't it funny how soon
sundown gets heah when yo' havin' a good time, and how long it is
a-comin' when yo' isn't!"

A dusky little figure rose up out of the weeds ahead of them. "Land
sakes! Ivy Hickman!" exclaimed John Jay, dropping his snake in surprise.
"How did you get heah?"

Ivy stuck her thumb in her mouth without answering. He took her by the
shoulder, about to shake a reply from her, when Bud exclaimed, in a
frightened voice, "Law, I see Mammy comin'. Look! There she is now, in
front of Uncle Billy's house!"

Throwing away his club, and catching Ivy up in his short arms, John Jay
staggered up the path leading to the back of the house as fast as such a
heavy load would allow, leaving Brer Tarrypin far in the rear. Just as
he sank down at the back door, all out of breath, old Sheba reached the
front one.

"John Jay," she called, "what you doing', chile?"

"Heah I is, Mammy," he answered. "I'se jus' takin' keer o' the chillun!"

"That's right, honey, I've got somethin' mighty good in my basket fo' we
all's suppah. Hurry up now, an' tote in some kin'lin' wood."

Never had John Jay sprung to obey as he did then. He shivered when he
thought of his narrow escape. His arms were piled so full of wood that
he could scarcely see over them, when he entered the poorly lighted
little cabin. He stumbled over the bottle of corn and the picture-book.
Maybe he would not have kicked them aside so gaily had he known that his
precious watch was lying in the cow-path on the side of the hill where
Ivy had dropped it.

Mammy was bending over, examining something at her feet. Five ragged
strips of pink calico lay along the floor, each held fast at one end by
a rusty tack driven into the puncheons. Ivy had grown tired of her
bondage, and had tugged and twisted until she got away. The faithful
tacks had held fast, but the pink calico, grown thin with long wear and
many washings, tore in ragged strips. Mammy glanced from the floor to
Ivy's tattered dress, and read the whole story.

Outside, across the road, Uncle Billy leaned over his front gate in the
deepening twilight, and peacefully puffed at his corn-cob pipe. As the
smoke curled up he bent his head to listen, as he had done in the early
morning. The day was ending as it had begun, with the whack of old
Mammy's shingle, and the noise of John Jay's loud weeping.




CHAPTER II.


It was a warm night in May. The bright moonlight shone in through the
chinks of the little cabin, and streamed across Ivy's face, where she
lay asleep on Mammy's big feather bed. Bud was gently snoring in his
corner of the trundle-bed below, but John Jay kicked restlessly beside
him. He could not sleep with the moonlight in his eyes and the frogs
croaking so mournfully in the pond back of the house. To begin with, it
was too early to go to bed, and in the second place he wasn't a bit
sleepy.

Mammy sat on a bench just outside of the door, with her elbows on her
knees. She was crooning a dismal song softly to herself,--something
about

  "Mary and Martha in deep distress,
  A-grievin' ovah brer Laz'rus' death."

It gave him such a creepy sort of feeling that he stuck his fingers in
his ears to shut out the sound. Thus barricaded, he did not hear slow
footsteps shuffling up the path; but presently the powerful fumes of a
rank pipe told of an approaching visitor. He took his fingers from his
ears and sat up.

Uncle Billy and Aunt Susan had come over to gossip a while. Mammy groped
her way into the house to drag out the wooden rocker for her
sister-in-law, while Uncle Billy tilted himself back against the cabin
in a straight splint-bottomed chair. The usual opening remarks about the
state of the family health, the weather, and the crops were of very
little interest to John Jay; indeed he nearly fell asleep while Aunt
Susan was giving a detailed account of the way she cured the misery in
her side. However, as soon as they began to discuss neighborhood
happenings, he was all attention.

The more interested he grew, it seemed to him, the lower they pitched
their voices. Creeping carefully across the floor, he curled up on his
pillow just inside the doorway, where the shadows fell heaviest, and
where he could enjoy every word of the conversation, without straining
his ears to listen.

"Gawge Chadwick came home yestiddy," announced Uncle Billy.

"Sho now!" exclaimed Mammy. "Not lame Jintsey's boy! You don't mean it!"

"That's the ve'y one," persisted Uncle Billy. "Gawge Washington
Chadwick. He's a ministah of the gospel now, home from college with a
Rev'und befo' his name, an' a long-tailed black coat on. He doesn't look
much like the little pickaninny that b'long to Mars' Nat back in wah
times."

"And Jintsey's dead, poah thing!" exclaimed Aunt Susan. "What a day it
would have been for her, if she could have lived to see her boy in the
pulpit!"

Conversation never kept on a straight road when these three were
together. It was continually turning back by countless by-paths to the
old slavery days. The rule of their master, Nat Chadwick, had been an
easy one. There had always been plenty in the smoke-house and
contentment in the quarters. These simple old souls, while rejoicing in
their freedom, often looked tenderly back to the flesh-pots of their
early Egypt.

John Jay had heard these reminiscences dozens of times. He knew just
what was coming next, when Uncle Billy began telling about the day that
young Mars' Nat was christened. Mis' Alice gave a silver cup to
Jintsey's baby, George Washington, because he was born on the same day
as his little Mars' Nat. John Jay knew the whole family history. He was
very proud of these people of gentle birth and breeding, whom Sheba
spoke of as "ou' family." One by one they had been carried to the little
Episcopal churchyard on the hill, until only one remained. The great
estate had passed into the hands of strangers. Only to Billy and Susan
and Sheba, faithful even unto death, was it still surrounded by the halo
of its old-time grandeur.

Naturally, young Nat Chadwick, the last of the line, had fallen heir to
all the love and respect with which they cherished any who bore the
family name. To other people he was a luckless sort of fellow, who had
sown his wild oats early, and met disappointment at every turn. It was
passed about, too, that there was a romance in his life which had
changed and embittered it. Certain it is, he suddenly seemed to lose all
ambition and energy. Instead of making the brilliant lawyer his friends
expected, he had come down at last to be the keeper of the toll-gate on
a country turnpike.

Lying on his pillow in the dense shadow, John Jay looked out into the
white moonlight, and listened to the old story told all over again. But
this time there was added the history of Jintsey's boy, who seemed to
have been born with the ambition hot in his heart to win an education.
He had done it. There was a quiver of pride in Uncle Billy's voice as he
told how the boy had outstripped his young master in the long race; but
there was a loyal and tender undercurrent of excuse for the unfortunate
heir running through all his talk.

It had taken twenty years of struggle and work for the little black boy
to realize his hopes. He had grown to be a grave man of thirty-three
before it was accomplished. Now he had come home from a Northern college
with his diploma and his degree.

"He have fought a good fight," said Uncle Billy in conclusion, finishing
as usual with a scriptural quotation. "He have fought a good fight, and
he have finished his co'se, but"--here his voice sank almost to a
whisper--"he have come home to die."

A chill seemed to creep all over John Jay's warm little body. He raised
his head from the pillow to listen still more carefully.

"Yes, they say he got the gallopin' consumption while he was up Nawth,
shovellin' snow an' such work, an' studyin' nights in a room 'thout no
fiah. He took ole Mars's name an' he have brought honah upon it, but
what good is it goin' to do him? Tell me that. For when the leaves go in
the autumn time, then Jintsey's boy must go too."

"Where's he stayin' at now?" demanded Mammy sharply, although she drew
the corner of her apron across her eyes.

"He's down to Mars' Nat's at the toll-gate cottage. 'Peahs like it's the
natch'el place for him to be. Neithah of 'em's got anybody else, and
it's kind a like old times when they was chillun, play in' round the big
house togethah. I stopped in to see him yestiddy. The cup Mis' Alice
gave him was a-settin' on the mantel, an' Mars' Nat was stewin' up some
sawt of cough tonic for him. The white folks up Nawth must a thought a
heap of him. He'd just got a lettah from one of the college professahs
'quirin' bout his health. Mars' Nat read out what was on the back of it:
'Rev'und Gawge W. Chadwick, an' some lettahs on the end that I kain't
remembah. An' he said, laughin'-like, sezee, 'well, Uncle Billy, you'd
nevah take that as meanin' Jintsey's boy, would you now? It's a mighty
fine soundin' title,' sezee. Gawge gave a little moanful sawt of smile,
same as to say, well, aftah all, it wasn't wuth what it cost him. An' it
wasn't! No, it wasn't," repeated Uncle Billy, solemnly shaking the ashes
from his pipe. "What's the good of a head full of book learnin' with a
poah puny body that kaint tote it around?"

Somehow, Uncle Billy's solemn declaration, "he have fought a good
fight," associated this colored preacher, in John Jay's simple little
mind, with soldiers and fierce battles and a great victory. He lay back
on his pillow, wishing they would go on talking about this man who had
suddenly become such a hero in his boyish eyes. But their talk gradually
drifted to the details of Mrs. Watson's last illness. He had heard them
so many times that he soon felt his eyelids slowly closing. Then he
dozed for a few minutes, awakening with a start. They had gotten as far
as the funeral now, and were discussing the sermon. They would soon be
commenting on the way that each member of the family "took her death."
That was so much more interesting, he thought he would just close his
eyes again for a moment, until they came to that.

Their voices murmured on in a pleasing flow; his head sunk lower on the
pillow, and his breathing was a little louder. Then his hand dropped
down at his side. He was sound asleep just when Aunt Susan was about to
begin one of her most thrilling ghost stories.

In the midst of an account of "a ha'nt that walked the graveyard every
thirteenth Friday in the year," John Jay turned over in his sleep with a
little snort. Aunt Susan nearly jumped out of her chair, and Uncle Billy
dropped his pipe. There was a moment of frightened silence till Mammy
said, "It must have been Bud, I reckon. John Jay is allus a-knockin' him
in his sleep an' makin' him holler out. Go on, sis' Susan."

The moon had travelled well across the sky when Mammy's guests said good
night. She lingered outside after they had gone, to look far down the
road, where a single point of light, shining through the trees, marked
the toll-gate. It would not be so lonely for Mars' Nat, now that George
had come home. She recalled the laughing face of the little black boy as
she had known it long ago, and tried to call up in her imagination a
picture of the man that Uncle Billy had described. Visions of the old
days rose before her. As she stood there with her hands wrapped in her
apron, it was not the moon-flooded night she looked into, but the warm,
living daylight of a golden past.

At last, with a sigh, she turned to take the chairs into the house.
Lifting the big rocker high in front of her, she stepped over the
threshold and started to shuffle her way along to the candle shelf. The
chair came down in the middle of the floor with a sudden bang, as she
caught her foot in John Jay's pillow and sprawled across him.

The boy's first waking thought was that there had been an earthquake and
that the cabin had caved in. He never could rightly remember the order
of events that followed, but he had a confused memory of a shriek, a
scratching of matches, and the glimmer of a candle that made him sit up
and blink his eyes. Then something struck him, first on one ear, then
the other, cuffing him soundly. He was too dazed to know why. Some blind
instinct helped him to find the bed and burrow down under the clothes,
where he lay trying to think what possible fault of his could have
raised such a cyclone about his ears. He was too deep under the
bedclothes to hear Mammy's grumbling remarks about his "tawmentin' ways"
as she rubbed her skinned elbow with tallow from the candle.




CHAPTER III.


Standing in the back door of Sheba's cabin one could see the red gables
of the old Chadwick house, rising above the dark pine-trees that
surrounded it. A wealthy city family by the name of Haven owned it now.
It was open only during the summer months. The roses that Mistress Alice
had set out with her own white hands years ago climbed all over the
front of the house, twining around its tall pillars, and hanging down in
festoons from its stately eaves. Cuttings from the same hardy plant had
been trained along the fences, around the tree-trunks and over
trellises, until the place had come to be known all around the country
as "Rosehaven."

Sheba always had steady employment when the place was open, for the
young ladies of the family kept her flat-irons busy with their endless
tucks and ruffles. She found a good market, too, for all the eggs she
could induce her buff cochins to lay, and all the berries that she
could make John Jay pick.

This bright June morning she stood in the door with a basket of fresh
eggs in her hand, looking anxiously across the fields to the gables of
Rosehaven, and grumbling to herself.

"Heah I done promise Miss Hallie these fresh aigs for her bufday cake,
an' no way to get 'em to her. I'll nevah get all these clothes done up
by night if I stop my i'onin', an' John Jay's done lit out again! little
black rascal!" She lifted up her voice in another wavering call. "John
Ja-a-y!" The beech woods opposite threw back the echo of her voice,
sweet and clear,--"Ja-a-y!"

"Heah I come, Mammy!" cried a panting voice. "I was jus' turnin' the
grine-stone for Uncle Billy."

She looked at him suspiciously an instant, then handed him the basket.
"Take these aigs ovah to Miss Hallie," she ordered, "and mind you be
quickah'n you was last time, or they might hatch befo' you get there."

"Law now, Mammy!" said John Jay, with a grin. He snatched at the basket,
impatient to be off, for while standing before her he had kept
scratching his right shoulder with his left hand; not that there was any
need to do so, but it gave him an excuse for holding together the jagged
edges of a great tear in his new shirt. He was afraid it might be
discovered before he could get away.

It was one of John Jay's peculiarities that in going on an errand he
always chose the most roundabout route. Now, instead of following the
narrow footpath that made a short cut through the cool beech woods, he
went half a mile out of his way, along the sunny turnpike.

[Illustration: Mars' Nat]

Mars' Nat stood outside his kitchen window, with his hands in his
pockets, giving orders to the colored boy within, who did his bachelor
housekeeping. Usually he had a joking word for old Sheba's grandson, but
this morning he took no notice of the little fellow loitering by with
such an appealing look on his face. John Jay had come past the toll-gate
with a hope of seeing the "Rev'und Gawge," as he called him. It had been
three weeks since the man had come home, and in that time John Jay's
interest in him had grown into a sort of hero-worship. There had been a
great deal of talk about him among the ignorant colored people.
Wonderful stories were afloat of his experiences at the North, of his
power as a preacher, and of the plans he had made to help his people. He
would have been surprised could he have known how he was discussed, or
how the stories grew as they travelled.

Those who had any claim whatever to a former acquaintance stopped at the
cottage to see him. Their interest and the little offerings of fruit or
flowers, which they often made their excuse for coming, touched him
greatly. To all who came he spoke freely of his hopes. Realizing that he
might have but the one opportunity, he talked as only a man can talk who
feels the responsibilities of a lifetime crowded into one short hour.
One by one they came and listened, and went away with a new expression
on their faces, and a new ambition in their hearts.

To all these people he was "Brothah Chadwick;" to the three old slaves
bound to him by ties almost as strong as those of kinship, he could
never be other than Jintsey's boy; but to two persons he was known as
the "Rev'und Gawge." Mars' Nat took to calling him that in a joking
way, but John Jay gave him the title almost with awe. It seemed to set
him apart in the child's reverent affection as one who had come up out
of great tribulation to highest honor. Old Sheba had not cuffed her
grandson to church every week in vain. He had heard a great deal about
white robes and palms of victory and "him that overcometh." By some
twist of his simple little brain the term Reverend had come to mean all
that to him, and much more. It meant not only some one set apart in a
priestly way, but some one who was just slipping down into the
mysterious valley of the shadow, with the shining of the New Jerusalem
upon his face.

As long as the cottage was in sight John Jay kept rolling his eyes
backward as he trudged along in the dust; but Mars' Nat was the only one
in view. Twice he stumbled and almost spilled the eggs. A little farther
along he concluded that he was tired enough to rest a while. So he sat
down on a log in a shady fence corner, and took a green apple from his
pocket. He rolled it around in his hands and over his face, enjoying its
tempting odor before he stuck his little white teeth into it. The first
bite was so sour that it drew his face all up into a pucker and made
his eyes water. He raised his hand to throw it away, but paused with his
arm in the air to listen. Somebody was playing on the organ in the
church a few rods up the hill.

It was a quaint little stone church, all overgrown with ivy, that the
Chadwicks had built generations ago. The high arched door was never
opened of late years, except at long intervals, when some one came out
from the city to hold services. But the side door was certainly ajar
now, for the saddest music that John Jay had ever heard in all his life
came trembling out on the warm summer air.

Forgetting all about his errand, he scrambled through the fence and up
the gently rising knoll. His bare feet made no noise as he tiptoed up
the steps and stood peering through the open door. It was dim and cool
inside, with only the light that could sift through the violet and amber
of the stained glass windows; but in one, the big one at the end, was
the figure of a snowy dove, with outstretched wings. Through this
silvery pane a long slanting ray of light, dazzling in its white
radiance, streamed across the keys of the organ and the man who played
them,--the Reverend George.

It threw a strange light on the upturned face,--a face black as ebony,
worn with suffering, but showing in every feature the refining touch of
a noble spirit. His mournful eyes seemed looking into another world,
while his fingers wandered over the keys with the musical instinct of
his race.

John Jay slipped inside and crouched down behind a tall pew. The only
music that he had been accustomed to was the kind that Uncle Billy
scraped from his fiddle and plunked on his banjo. It was the gay,
rollicking kind, that put his feet to jigging and every muscle in his
body quivering in time. This made him want to cry; yet it was so sweet
and deep and tender as it went rolling softly down the aisles, that he
forgot all about the eggs and Miss Hallie. He forgot that he was John
Jay. All he thought of was that upturned face with the strange unearthly
light in its dark eyes, and the melody that swept over him.

A spell of coughing seized the rapt musician. After it had passed, he
lay forward on the organ a while, with his head bowed on his arms. Then
he straightened himself up wearily, and began pushing the stops back
into their places.

The silence brought John Jay to his senses. He crawled along the aisle
and out of the door, blinkling like an owl as he came into the blinding
sunshine. Many experiences had convinced him that he was born under an
unlucky star. When he went leaping down the hill to the log where he had
left his basket, it was with the sickening certainty that some evil had
befallen the eggs. He was afraid to look for fear of finding a mass of
broken shells strewn over the ground. It was with a feeling of surprise
that he saw the white ends of the top layer of eggs peeping out of their
bed of bran, just as he had left them. With a sigh of relief he picked
up the basket; then whistling gaily as a mockingbird, he set out once
more in the direction of Rosehaven.




CHAPTER IV.


Something unusual was going on at Rosehaven. Awnings were spread over
the lawn, gay colored lanterns were strung all about the grounds, and a
stage for outdoor tableaux had been built near the house, where a dark
clump of cedars served as a background.

John Jay had orders to take the eggs directly to the cook, but his
curiosity kept him standing open-mouthed on the lawn, watching the
hanging of the lanterns.

[Illustration: A group of pretty Girls sat on the porch]

A group of pretty girls sat on the porch steps, between the white
rose-twined pillars. One of them was tying up the cue of an
old-fashioned wig with a black ribbon; another was mending the gold lace
on a velvet coat, and the others were busy with the various costumes
which they were to wear in the tableaux. Now and then a gay trill or a
snatch from some popular song floated out above their laughing chatter.
Suddenly one of them looked up and saw John Jay standing in the
gravelled drive.

"Look, girls!" she exclaimed. "Here's the very thing we want for our old
Virginia days! Hallie looks like a picture in that lovely brocaded satin
of her grandmother's, and Raleigh Stanford does the cavalier to
perfection in that farewell scene. All it lacks is some little Jim Crow
to hold his horse, and there is one now. Oh, Hallie! come out here a
minute!"

In response to her call, a beautiful dark-haired girl came out on the
porch from the hall, carrying a pasteboard shield which she had just
finished covering with tinfoil. John Jay's mouth opened still wider as
it flashed a dazzling light into his eyes. He thought it was silver.

"Isn't it fine?" she asked, waltzing around with it on her arm for them
to admire the effect. Then she dropped down on the step above them. "Was
it you who called me, Sally Lou?" she asked.

"Yes," answered the girl, who had finished tying up the cue, and now had
the wig pulled coquettishly over her blonde curls. "Look at the little
darkey over there. I was just telling the girls that he is all that is
needed to complete your cavalier tableau. Call him over here and tell
him that he must come to-night." Just then the boy turned and started on
a trot to the kitchen. "Why, it's John Jay!" exclaimed Hallie. "Old Lucy
has been scolding about those eggs for the last two hours. His
grandmother promised to send them over immediately after breakfast. I'll
go down and see what kept him so long. He is always getting into
trouble."

"Make him come up here," begged Sally Lou, "and get him to talk for us.
I know he'll be lots of fun, for he has such a bright face."

In a few moments the laughing young hostess was back among her guests,
with John Jay following her. "Don't you want to see all my birthday
presents?" she asked, leading the way into the library and beckoning the
girls to follow. "See! I found this mandolin in my chair when I went to
the breakfast-table this morning, and this watch was under my napkin.
This tennis-racquet was on the piano when I came up-stairs, and I've
been finding books and things all morning." She opened a great box of
chocolate bonbons as she spoke, and filled both his hands.

[Illustration: Filled both his hands]

He looked about him with round, astonished eyes, but never said a word
in answer to the eager questions of the girls, beyond a bashful "yessa"
or "no'm."

The arrival of Raleigh Stanford and one of his friends, on their wheels,
put an end to the girls' interest in John Jay. He was dismissed with a
message to Sheba that sent him flying home through the woods like an
excited little whirlwind. The lid of the basket flopped up and down, in
time to the motion of his scampering feet. At the foot of the hill he
began calling "Mammy!" and kept it up until he reached the door. By that
time, he was so out of breath that he could only gasp his message. Sheba
was expected to be at Rosehaven at seven o'clock, and John Jay was to
take part in the performance on the lawn.

It took a great deal of cross-questioning before Mammy fully understood
the arrangement. She could readily see that her services might be
desired in the kitchen, but it puzzled her to know what anybody could
want of John Jay. She shook her head a great many times before she
finally promised that he might go.

Bud had passed a very dull morning without his adventurous brother. Now
he came up with a bit of rope with which to play horse. But John Jay was
looking down on such sports at present.

"Aw, go way, boy," he said, with a lofty air. "I ain't no hawse. I'se
goin' to a buthday-pa'ty to-night. Miss Hallie done give me an
invite--me an' Mammy."

"Whose goin' to stay with me an' Ivy?" asked Bud, anxiously.

"Aunt Susan, I reckon," answered John Jay. "Mammy tole me to go ask her.
Come along with me, an' I'll tell you what all Miss Hallie got for her
buthday. I reckon she had mos' a thousand presents, an' a box of candy
half as big as Ivy."

Bud opened his eyes in amazement.

"Deed she did," persisted John Jay, enjoying the sensation he was
making. "She gave me some, and I saved a piece for you." After much
searching through his pockets, John Jay handed out a big chocolate cream
that had been mashed flat. Bud ate it gratefully as they walked on, and
wiped his lips with his little red tongue, longing for more.

After supper, as Mammy and John Jay went down the narrow meadow path in
Indian file, he ventured a question that he had pondered all day.
"Mammy, does we all have buthdays same as white folks?"

"Of co'se," answered the old woman, tramping on ahead with her skirts
held high out of the dewy grass.

"When's yoah's?" he asked, after a pause.

"Well," she began reflectively, not willing to acknowledge that she had
never known the exact date, "I'm nevah ve'y p'tick'lah 'bout its
obsa'vation. It's on a Monday, long in early garden-makin' time."

They had come to a little brook, bridged by a wide, hewed log. When they
had crossed in careful silence, John Jay began again. "Mammy, when's my
buthday?"

"I kaint tell 'zactly, honey," she answered, "'twel I adds it up." As
she began counting on her fingers, her skirts slipped lower and lower
from her grasp, until they brushed the dew of the wayside weeds.

"Yes, that's it," she announced at last. "Miss Hallie is nineteen this
Satiddy, and you'll be nine next Satiddy. A week from to-day is yoah
buthday. Pity it hadn't a-happened to be the same day, then maybe Mis'
Haven mought a give you somethin' like Mis' Alice give Jintsey's boy."

John Jay had that same thought all the rest of the way to Rosehaven,
but after they entered the brilliantly illuminated grounds he seemed to
stop thinking altogether. It was a sight beyond all that his wildest
imaginings had pictured. He did not recognize the place. All the
lanterns were lighted now, hanging like strings of stars around the
porches, and from tree to tree. Violins played softly, somewhere out of
sight, and everywhere on the night air was the breath of myriads of
roses. Handsomely dressed people passed in and out of the house, and
across the lawn. The light, the music, and the perfume made the place
seem enchanted ground to the bewildered little John Jay, and when he
reached the illuminated fountain just in front of the house, he clung to
Mammy's skirts as if he had suddenly found himself in some strange Eden,
and was frightened by its unearthly beauty.

The fountain into which, only that morning, he had thrust his hot little
face for a drink, now seemed bewitched. It was no longer a flow of
sparkling water, but of splashing rainbows. From palest green to ruby
red, from amethyst to amber it paled and deepened and glowed.

All the evening he moved about like one in a dream. The tableaux with
their shifting scenes of knights and ladies and marble statuary were
burned on his memory as heavenly visions. He knew nothing of the tinsel
and flour and red lights which produced the effect. He stood about as
Miss Hallie told him: he held a horse in one tableau, and posed as a
bronze statue in another. Then he went back to the fountain, and sat
dreamily watching it, while the violins played again,--in the long
parlors this time, where the dancing had begun.

Raleigh Stanford, still in his cavalier costume, and with Miss Sally Lou
on his arm, spied him as they passed by. "Oh, there's that funny little
fellow that was here this morning!" she said. "We tried to make him
talk, but he just kept his head on one side, and was too embarrassed to
say anything."

"Hey, Sambo," called the young man suddenly in his ear. "What do you
know?"

John Jay gave a start, and looked up at the amused faces above him. He
took the question seriously, and thought he must really tell what he
knew; but just at that moment he could remember only one thing in all
the wide world. Every other bit of information seemed to desert him. So
he stammered, "I--I know M--Miss Hallie, she's nineteen this Satiddy,
an' I'll be nine next Satiddy."

Miss Sally Lou laughed so gaily that her young cavalier made another
effort to please her.

"Is that so!" he exclaimed, as if surprised. "It's a mighty lucky thing
you told me that, now, or I never would have thought to bring you
anything. You didn't know that I am a sort of birthday Santa Claus, did
you? Just look out for me next Saturday. If I'm not there by
breakfast-time, wait till noon, and if I don't get there by that time
it'll be because something has happened; anyway, somebody'll be prancing
along about sundown."

"Oh, come along, Raleigh," said Miss Sally Lou, moving off toward the
house. "You're such a tease."

John Jay, sitting beside that wonderful fountain and surrounded by so
many strange, beautiful things, did not think it at all queer that such
an unheard-of person as a birthday Santa Claus should suddenly step out
from the midst of the enchantment and speak to him.

"A blue velvet cape on," he said to himself, thinking how he should
describe him to Bud. "An' gole buckles on his shoes, an' a sword on,
an' a long white feathah in his hat. Cricky! An' it was his hawse I done
held! Maybe it will be somethin' mighty fine what he's goin' to bring
me, 'cause I did that!"

Later he found his way to the kitchen, where Sheba was washing dishes.
The cook gave him a plate of ice-cream and some scraps of cake. She was
telling Sheba how beautiful Miss Hallie's birthday cake looked at
dinner, with its nineteen little wax candles all aflame. That was the
last thing John Jay remembered, until some one shook him, and told him
it was time to go home. He had fallen asleep with a spoon in his hand.

Mammy was afraid to take the short cut through the woods after dark, so
she led him away round by the toll-gate. He was so sleepy that he
staggered up against her every few steps, and he would have dropped down
on the first log he came to, if she had not kept tight hold of his hand
all the way.

When they reached Uncle Billy's house, he had just gone out to draw a
pitcher of water. Mammy stopped to get a drink, and John Jay leaned up
against the well-shed. The rumbling of the windlass and the fall of the
bucket against the water below aroused him somewhat, and by the time he
had swallowed half a gourdful of the cold well-water he was wide awake.

Uncle Billy went up to the cabin with them in order to hear an account
of the party, and to walk back with Aunt Susan. John Jay fell behind. He
could not remember ever having been out so late at night before, and he
had never seen the sky so full of stars. They made him think of
something that Aunt Susan had told him. She said that if he counted
seven stars for seven nights, at the same time repeating a charm which
she taught him, and making a wish, he'd certainly get what he wanted at
the end of the week.

Now he stopped still in the path, and slowly pointing to each star with
his little black forefinger, as he counted them, solemnly repeated the
charm:

  "Star-light, star bright,
  Seventh star I've seen to-night;
  I wish I may and I wish I might
  Have the wish come true I wish to-night."

"Come on in, chile! What you gawkin' at?" called Mammy from the doorway.
John Jay made no answer. It would have broken the charm to have spoken
again before going to sleep. He hurried into the house, glad that Mammy
was so occupied with her company that she could pay no attention to him.
She stood in the door with them so long that John Jay was in bed by the
time she came in. Although he pretended to be asleep, inwardly he was in
a quiver of excitement.

"I'll count 'em every night," he thought. The wish that burned in his
little heart was a very earnest one, fraught with hopes for his coming
birthday.




CHAPTER V.


Late hours did not agree with John Jay. Next morning he felt too tired
to stir. He groaned when he remembered that it was Sunday, for he
thought of the long, hot walk down to Brier Crook church. To his great
surprise, Mammy did not insist on his going with her: she had been
offered a seat in a neighbor's spring-wagon, and there was no room for
him.

So he spent a long, lazy morning, stretched out in the shade of the
apple-tree. A smell of clover and ripening orchards filled the heated
air. The hens clucked around drowsily with drooping wings. A warm breeze
stirred the grasses where he lay.

Ivy dug in the dirt with a broken spoon, while Bud kicked up his heels
beside John Jay, listening to a marvellous account of Miss Hallie's
party. It lost nothing in the telling. For years after, John Jay looked
back upon that night as a John of Patmos might have looked, remembering
some vision of the opened heavens. The lights, the music, the
white-robed figures, and above all, that wonderful fountain looking as
if it must have sprung from some "sea of glass mingled with fire," did
not belong to the earth with which he was acquainted. He repeated some
part of that recollection to Bud every day for a week, always ending
with the sentence uppermost in his thought: "And next Satiddy _I_ has a
buthday."

[Illustration: Under the apple-tree]

Of course he knew that his celebration could be nothing like Miss
Hallie's; but he had a vague idea that something would happen to make
the day unusual and delightful. Every night after he had gone to bed,
and when Mammy was drowsing on the doorstep, he raised himself to his
knees, and looked through a wide hole in the wall where the chinking had
dropped out from between the logs. Through this he could see a strip of
sky studded with twinkling stars. One by one he pointed out the magic
seven, repeating the charm and whispering the wish.

It was a long week, because he was in such a hurry for it to go by. But
Friday night came at last; and, as he counted the stars for the seventh
time, the little flutter of excitement in his veins made them seem to
dance before his eyes.

Early Saturday morning he was awakened by Mammy's stirring around
outside among the chickens, and instantly he remembered that the
long-looked-for day had come. Somehow, a feeling of expectancy made it
seem different from other days. He wanted it to last just as long as
possible, so he lay there thinking about it, and wondering what would
happen first.

As soon as he was dressed, Mammy sent him to the spring for water. He
was gone some time, for he had a faint hope that the birthday Santa
Claus whom he had met at Miss Hallie's party might come early, and he
spent several minutes looking down the road.

Breakfast was ready when he reached the house, and he set the pail down
in such a hurry that some of the water slopped out on his bare toes. His
wistful eyes scanned the table quickly. There was a better breakfast
than usual--bacon and eggs this morning. There was no napkin on the
table under which some gift might lie in hiding, but remembering Miss
Hallie's other experiences, he pulled out his chair. A little shade of
disappointment crept into his face when he found it empty.

After he had speared a piece of bacon with his two-tined fork, and
landed it safely on his plate, he rolled his eyes around the table. "Did
you know this is my buthday, Mammy?" he asked. "I'm nine yeahs ole
to-day."

"That's so, honey," she answered, cheerfully. "You'se gettin' to be a
big boy now, plenty big enough to keep out o' mischief an' take keer o'
yo' clothes. I'll declare if there isn't anothah hole in yo' shirt this
blessed minute!"

The lecture that followed was not of the gala-day kind, but John Jay
consoled himself by thinking that he would probably have had a cuffing
instead had it happened on any other day.

After breakfast Mammy went away to do a day's scrubbing at Rosehaven.
The children spent most of the morning in watching the road. Every cloud
of dust that tokened an approaching traveller raised a new hope. Many
people went by on horses or in carriages. Once in a while there was a
stray bicycler, but nobody turned in towards the cabin.

After a while, in virtue of its being his especial holiday, John Jay
ordered the smaller children to stay in the yard, while he took a swim
in the pond. But the pleasure did not last long. He could only splash
and paddle around dog-fashion, and the sun burnt his back so badly that
he was glad to get out of the water.

Afternoon came, and nothing unusual had happened, but John Jay kept up
his courage and looked around for something to do to occupy the time. A
wide plank leaned up against the little shed at one side of the cabin.
It made him think of Uncle Billy's cellar door, where he had spent many
a happy hour sliding.

"I'm goin' to have a coast," he said to Bud. A smooth board which he
found near the woodpile furnished him with a fine toboggan. By the help
of an overturned chicken-coop, which he dragged across the yard, he
managed to climb to the top of the shed. Squatting down on the board, he
gave himself a starting push with one hand. The downward progress was
not so smooth or so rapid as he desired.

"Needs greasin'," he said, looking at the plank with a knowing frown. A
rummage through the old corner cupboard where the provisions were kept
provided him with a wide strip of bacon rind, such as Uncle Billy used
to rub on his saw. John Jay carried it out of doors and carefully rubbed
the plank from one end to the other. Then he greased the underside of
the little board on which he intended to sit. The result was all he
could wish. He slid down the plank at a speed that took his breath. Up
he climbed from the coop to the shed, carrying his board with him, and
down he slid to the ground, time and again, yelling and laughing as he
went, until Bud began to be anxious for his turn. When the little fellow
was boosted to the shed, he did not make a noise as John Jay had done;
he slid in solemn silence and unspoken delight.

Over an hour of such sport had gone by when Bud remarked, "Ivy's
a-missin' all the fun."

"She's too little to go down by herself," answered John Jay; "but if I
had another little board I'd take her down in front of me."

He began looking around the wood-pile for one. Then he caught sight of
the big dish-pan, which had been set outside on the logs to sun.

"That's the ve'y thing!" he exclaimed. "It'll jus' hole her." The bacon
rind was nearly rubbed dry by this time, but the pan, heated by sitting
so long in the sun, drew out all the grease that remained. It took the
united strength of both boys to get Ivy to the top of the shed, but at
last she was seated, with John Jay just behind her on his little board,
his legs thrown protectingly around the pan. They shot down so fast that
Ivy was terrified. No sooner was she dumped out of the pan on to the
ground than she retired to a safe distance, and stuck her thumb in her
mouth. Nothing could induce her to get in again.

"I'm goin' down in the dish-pan by myself," announced Bud from the shed
roof. "It jus' fits me."

John Jay grinned, and stood a little to one side to watch the
performance. "Go it, Brer Tarrypin!" he shouted.

Maybe Bud leaned a little too much to one side. Maybe the pan missed the
guiding legs that had held it steady before. At any rate something was
amiss, for half-way down the plank it spun dizzily around to one side,
and spilled the luckless Bud out on the chicken-coop. Usually he made
very little fuss when he was hurt, but this time he set up such a roar
that John Jay was frightened. When he saw blood trickling out of the
child's mouth, he began to cry himself. He was just about to run for
Aunt Susan, when Bud suddenly stopped crying, and turned toward him with
a look of terror.

"Aw, I done knock a tooth out!" he exclaimed, and began crying harder
than before, feeling that he had been damaged beyond repair.

John Jay laughed when he found that nothing worse had happened than the
loss of a little white front tooth, and soon dried Bud's tears by
promising that a new one would certainly fill the hole in time.

"Keep yoah mouf shet much as you can when Mammy comes home to-night," he
cautioned; "for I sut'n'ly don't want to ketch a lickin' on my buthday.
It's mighty lucky the pan didn't get a hole knocked in her."

Mammy came home just before dark. The children were on the fence waiting
for her. John Jay felt sure that if Miss Hallie knew that it was his
birthday she would send him something. He wondered if Mammy had told
her. The basket on the old woman's head was always interesting to these
children, for it never came back from Rosehaven empty. The cook always
saved the scraps for Sheba's hungry little charges. This evening John
Jay kept his eyes fixed on it expectantly, as he followed it up the
walk. He had thrown one foot up behind him, and rested the toes of it in
his clasped hands as he hopped along on the other. Maybe there might be
a birthday cake in that basket, with little candles on it. He didn't
know, of course,--but--_maybe_.

They all crowded around, as Sheba put the basket on the table and took
out some scraps of boiled ham, a handful of cookies, and half of an
apple pie. That was all. John Jay looked at them a moment with misty
eyes, and turned away with a lump in his throat. He was beginning to
grow discouraged.

Mammy was so tired that she did not cook anything for supper, as she had
intended, but set out the contents of the basket beside the corn bread
left from dinner. Before they were through eating somebody called for
sis' Sheba to come quick, that Aunt Susan was having one of her old
spells.

"Like enough I won't get back for a good while," said Mammy, as she
hurriedly left the table. "Put Ivy to bed as soon as you wash her face,
John Jay, an' go yo'self when the propah time comes. Be a good boy now,
and don't forget to close the doah tight when you go in."

When Ivy was safely tucked away among the pillows, the two boys sat down
on the door-step to wait once more for the birthday Santa Claus. John
Jay repeated what the thoughtless fellow had said:

"If I don't get there by noon, it'll be because something has happened;
anyway, somebody'll be prancing along about sundown." In the week just
passed, Bud had come to believe in the birthday Santa Claus as firmly
as John Jay.

"Wondah wot he's doin' now?" he said, after a long pause and an anxious
glance down the darkening road.

Ah, well for those two trusting little hearts that they could not know!
He was sitting on the steps of the porch at Rosehaven with a guitar on
his knee, and smiling tenderly into Sally Lou's blue eyes as he sang,
"Oh, yes, I ever will be true!"

It grew darker and darker. The katydids began their endless quarrel in
the trees. A night-owl hooted dismally over in the woods. The children
stopped talking, and sat in anxious silence. Presently Bud edged up
closer, and put a sympathetic arm around his brother. A moment after, he
began to cry.

"What you snufflin' for?" asked John Jay savagely. "'Tain't yo'
buthday."

"But I'm afraid you ain't goin' to have any eithah," sobbed the little
fellow, strangely wrought upon by this long silent waiting in the
darkness.

"Aw, you go 'long to bed," said John Jay, with a careless, grown-up air.
"If anything comes I'll wake you up. No use for two of us to be settin'
heah."

Bud was sleepy, and crept away obediently; but the day was spoiled, and
he went to bed sore with his brother's disappointment.

John Jay sat down again to keep his lonely tryst. He looked up at the
faithless stars. They had failed to help him, but in his desperation he
determined to appeal to them once more. So he picked out the seven
largest ones he could see and repeated very slowly, in a voice that
would tremble, the old charm:

  "Star-light, star bright,
  Seventh star I've seen to-night;
  I wish I may and I wish I might
  Have the wish come true I wish to-night."

Then he made his wish again, with a heart felt earnestness that was
almost an ache. Oh, surely the day was not going to end in this cruel
silence! Just then he heard the thud of a horse's hoofs on the wooden
bridge, far down the road. Nearer and louder it came. Somebody was
prancing by at last. He stood up, straining his eyes in his smiling
eagerness to see. Nearer and nearer the hoof-beats came in the
starlight. "_Bookity book! Bookity book!_" The horseman paused a moment
in front of Uncle Billy's.

John Jay hopped from one foot to the other in his impatient gladness.
Then his heart sank as the hoof-beats went on down the road, _Bookity
book! Bookity book!_ growing fainter and fainter, until at last they
were drowned by the voices of the noisy katydids.

He stood still a moment, so bitterly disappointed that it seemed to him
he could not possibly bear it. Then he went in and shut the door,--shut
the door on all his bright hopes, on all his fond dreams, on the day
that was to have held such happiness, but that had brought instead the
cruelest disappointment of his life.

The tears ran down his little black face as he undressed himself. He sat
on the edge of the trundle-bed a moment, whispering brokenly, "They
wasn't anybody livin' that cared 'bout it's bein' my buthday!" Then
throwing himself face downward on his pillow, he cried softly with long
choking sobs, until he fell asleep.




CHAPTER VI.


Although John Jay bore many a deep scar, both in mind and body, very
little of his life had been given to sackcloth and ashes.

"Wish I could take trouble as easy as that boy," sighed Mammy. "It
slides right off'n him like watah off a duck's back."

"He's like the rollin' stone that gethah's no moss," remarked Uncle
Billy. "He goes rollickin' through the days, from sunup 'twel sundown,
so fast that disappointment and sorrow get rubbed off befo' they kin
strike root."

Despite all his troubles, if John Jay had been marking his good times
with white stones, there would have been enough to build a wall all
around the little cabin by the end of the summer. There were two days
especially that he remembered with deepest satisfaction: one was the
Saturday when Mars' Nat took him to the circus, and the other was the
Fourth of July, when all the family went to the Oak Grove barbecue.

[Illustration: Uncle Billy]

But now blackberry season had begun,--a season that he hated, because
Mammy expected him to help her early and late in the patch. So many of
the shining berries slipped down his throat, so many things called his
attention away from the brambly bushes, that sometimes it took hours for
him to fill his battered quart cup.

Usually his reward was a juicy pie, but this year Mammy changed her
plan. Berries were in demand at Rosehaven, and she had very little time
to spend in going after them.

"I'll give you five cents a gallon for all you'll pick," she said to
John Jay. He looked at her in amazement. As he had never had any money
in his life, this seemed a princely offer. He was standing outside by
the stick chimney when she made the promise. After one sidelong glance,
to see if she were in earnest, he threw his feet wildly into the air and
walked off on his hands; then, after two or three somersaults backward,
he stood up, panting.

"Where's the buckets at?" he demanded, "I'm goin' to pick every bush in
this neck o' woods as clean as you'd pick a chicken."

Now it was Mammy's turn to be surprised. She had expected that her
offer would lure him on for an hour or two, maybe for a whole day. She
had not supposed that it would keep him faithfully at work for a week,
but it did. His nimble fingers stripped every roadside vine within a
mile of the cabin. His hands and legs, and even his face, were
criss-crossed with many brier scratches. The sun beat down on him
unmercifully, but he stuck to his task so closely that he seemed to see
berries even when his eyes were shut. Every day great pailfuls of the
shining black beads were sent over to Rosehaven, and every night he
dropped a few more nickels into the stocking foot hidden under his
pillow.

"Berries is all mighty nigh cleaned out," he said one noon, when he was
about to start out again after dinner. "Uncle Billy says there's lots of
'em down in the gandah thicket, but I'se mos' afeered to go there."

"Nothin' won't tech you in daylight, honey," answered Mammy,
encouragingly, "but I would n't go through there at night for love or
money I'd as lief go into a lion's cage."

"Did you ever see any ghos'es down there Mammy?" asked John Jay with
eager interest, yet cautiously lowering his voice and taking a step
nearer.

"No," admitted Mammy, "but oldah people than I have seen 'em. All night
long there's great white gandahs flappin' round through that thicket
'thout any heads on. You know they's an awful wicked man buried down
there in the woods, an' the sperrits of them he's inju'ed ha'nts the
thicket every night. There isn't anybody, that I know of, that 'ud go
down there aftah dark for anything on this livin' yearth."

"Then who sees 'em?" asked John Jay, with a skeptical grin.

"Who sees 'em?" repeated Mammy wrathfully, angry because of the doubt
implied by his question and his face. "Who sees 'em? They've been seen
by generations of them as is dead and gone. Who is you, I'd like to
know, standin' up there a-mockin' at me so impident and a-askin' 'Who
sees 'em?'"

She turned to begin her dish washing, with a scornful air that seemed to
say that he was beneath any further notice. Still, no sooner had she
piled the dishes up in the pan than she turned to him again, with her
hands on her hips.

"Go down and ask Uncle Mose," she said, still indignant. "He can tell
you tales that'll send cole chills up an' down yo' spine. He saw an
awful thing in there once with his own eyes. 'Twan't a gandah, but
somethin' long an slim flyin' low in the bushes--he reckoned it was
twenty feet long. It had a little thin head like a snake, an' yeahs that
stuck up like rabbit's. It was all white, an' had fo' little short legs
an' two little short wings, an' it was moah'n flesh an' blood could
stand, he say, to see that long, slim, white thing runnin' an' a-flyin'
at the same time through the bushes, low down neah the groun'. You jus'
go ask him."

John Jay swung his buckets irresolutely. "I don't believe I'll go down
there aftah berries," he said. "I don't know what to do. They isn't any
moah anywhere else."

Mammy wished that she had not gone to such pains to convince him.
"Nothin' evah comes around in the daytime," she insisted, "an' I reckon
berries is mighty plentiful, too," she added, persuasively. "Nobody evah
saw anything down there in the daylight, honey. I'd go if I was you."

John Jay stood on one foot. He was afraid of the headless ganders, but
he did want those berries. He walked out through the door, hesitated,
and stood on one foot again. Then he went slowly down the hill. Mammy,
standing in the door with her apron flung over her head, watched him
climb up on the fence and sit there to consider. Finally, he dropped
down to the other side, and started in the direction of the gander
thicket.

It was a place that the negroes had been afraid of since her earliest
recollection. It was only a little stretch of woodland, where the
neglected underbrush had grown into a tangled thicket. No one remembered
now what had given rise to the name, and no one living had ever seen the
ghostly white ganders that were said to haunt the place at night. Still,
the story was handed down from one to another, and the place was shunned
as much as possible.

Brier Crook church stood at one end, with its desolate little graveyard,
where the colored people buried their dead under its weeping willows and
gloomy cedars.

John Jay avoided the lonely road that led in that direction, and took
the one that wound around the other end of the thicket, past a deserted
mill. Yet, when he reached the ruined old building, with its staring
windows and sunken roof, he was half sorry that he had not gone the
other way.

The berries were on the far side of the thicket, and he was obliged to
pass either the graveyard or the old mill to reach them. The possibility
of plunging boldly into the thicket and pushing his way through to the
other side had never occurred to him, although it is doubtful if he
would have dared to do so even had he thought of it. He ran down the dry
bed of the stream, and past the silent moss-grown wheel, breathing a
sigh of relief when he came out into an open field beyond.

Balancing himself on the top rail of the fence, he looked cautiously
along the edge of the thicket. It did not look so dismal in there, after
all. A woodpecker's cheerful tapping sounded somewhere within.
Butterflies flitted fearlessly down into its shady ravines. A squirrel
ran out on a limb, and sat chattering at him saucily. Then a big gray
rabbit rustled through the leaves, and went loping away into the depths
of the thicket.

"I don't believe there's anything skeery in there at all!" exclaimed
John Jay aloud. After starting several times, and stopping to look all
around and listen, he followed the rabbit into the bushes. Plunging down
a narrow cow-path which wound in and out, he came to an open space where
a few trees had fallen. Here, with an exclamation of delight, he pounced
upon the finest, largest berries he had ever seen. They dropped into the
tin pail with a noisy thud at first, and then with scarcely a sound, as
they rapidly piled higher and higher.

Both pails were filled in a much shorter time than usual, and then he
sat down on a wide log to enjoy the lunch he had brought with him. There
were two big slices of bread and jam in one pocket, and a big apple in
the other. As he sat there, slowly munching, he began to feel drowsy. He
had awakened early that morning, and had worked hard in the hot sun. He
stretched himself out full length on the log, to rest his back while he
finished eating his apple.

The branches overhead swayed gently back and forth. His eyes followed
them as they kept up that slow, monotonous motion against the bright
sky. He had no intention of closing them; in fact, he did not know they
were closed, for in that same moment he was sound asleep.

The woodpecker went on tapping; the squirrel whisked back and forth
along the limb; the same gray rabbit came out and hopped along beside
the log where he lay. Suddenly, it raised itself up to look at the
strange sight, and then bounded away again. The sun dropped lower and
lower. In the open fields there was still light, but the thicket was
gray with the subdued shadows of the gloaming.

John Jay might have slept on all night had not a leaf fluttered slowly
down from the tree above, and brushed across his face. He opened his
eyes, looking all around him in a bewildered way. Then he sat up, and
peered through the bushes. A cold perspiration covered him when he
realized that it was dusk and that he was in the middle of the gander
thicket. He snatched up the blackberries, a pail in each hand, and stood
looking helplessly around him, for he could not decide which way to go.
In front of him stretched half a mile of the haunted thicket. It was
either to push his way through that as quickly as possible, or to go
back by the long, lonesome road over which he had come.

Just then a harmless flock of geese belonging to an old market-gardener
who lived near came waddling up from the creek, on the way home to their
barn-yard. They moved along in a silent procession, pushing their long,
thin necks through the underbrush. John Jay was too terrified to see
that their heads were properly in place, and that they were as harmless
as the flock that fed in Aunt Susan's dooryard.

"They'll get me! They'll get me!" he whimpered, as they came nearer and
nearer, for his feet seemed so heavy that he could not lift them when he
tried to run. Made desperate by his fear, he raised first one pail of
berries and then the other, hurling them at the startled geese with all
the force his wiry little arms could muster.

Instantly their long white wings shot up through the bushes. There was
an angry fluttering and hissing, as half running, half flying, they
waddled faster towards home. John Jay did not look to see what direction
they were taking. He was sure they were after him. He could hear their
long wings flapping just behind him; at least, he thought he could, but
the noise he heard was the snapping of the twigs he trampled in his
headlong flight. No greyhound ever bounded through a wood with lighter
feet than those which carried him. His eyes were wide with fright. His
heart beat so hard in his throat he thought he would surely die before
he could reach the cabin. At every step the light seemed to be growing
dimmer and the thicket denser, although he thought he certainly must
have been running long enough to have reached the clearing. Still he ran
on, and on, and on. The recollection of one of Mammy's stories flashed
across his mind.

[Illustration: The ganders had chased him around]

Once a man had lost his way in this wood, and the ganders had chased him
around and around until daylight. The thought made him so weak in the
knees that he was ready to drop from fright and exhaustion. Then he
recalled a superstition that he had often heard, that anyone who has
lost his way may find it again by turning his pocket wrong side out. He
was twitching at his with trembling hands, looking with eyes too
frightened to see, and fumbling with fingers too stiff with fear to
feel, but the pocket seemed to have disappeared. "It's conju'ed too," he
wailed, as he ran heedlessly on.

Something long and white slapped across his face. An unearthly, wavering
voice sounded a hoarse, long-drawn "Moo-oo-oo!" just in front of him. He
sank down in a helpless little heap, blubbering and groaning aloud, with
his teeth chattering, and the tears running down his clammy face. There
was a louder crackling, and out of the bushes walked an old spotted cow,
calmly switching her white tail and looking at John Jay in gentle-eyed
wonder.

Strength came back to the boy with that familiar sight, but not being
sure that the cow was not as ghostly as the ganders, he scrambled to his
feet and started to run again. To avoid passing the cow, he turned in
another direction. This time, it happened to be the right one, and in a
few moments more he had dashed into the open. Then he saw that it was
not yet dark in the fields.

Mammy heard the sound of rapid running up the path, and came to the
door. John Jay dropped at her feet, trembling and cold, and so
frightened that he could only cling to her skirts, sobbing piteously.
When, at last, he found his breath, all he could gasp was, "Oh, Mammy!
the gandahs are aftah me! the gandahs are aftah me!"

Big boy as he was, Mammy stooped and lifted him in her arms, and holding
him close, with his head on her shoulder, rocked back and forth in the
big wooden chair until he grew calmer. Not until he had sobbed out the
whole story, and wiped his eyes several times on her apron, did he see
that there was company in the room.

George Chadwick was sitting by the door. It was the first time he had
been in the cabin since his return from college. He had ridden up from
the toll-gate on a passing wagon to see his old friend, Sheba, and had
been there the greater part of the afternoon, listening to her tales of
his mother in the old slavery days. He had not intended to accept her
urgent invitation to stay to supper, but when he saw that she shared
John Jay's fright, he decided to remain. Had it not been for his
protecting presence in the house, Mammy was so affected by the boy's
story that she would have barred every opening. Then, cowering around
one little flickering candle, they would have fed each other's
superstitious fears until bedtime. George knew this, and so he stayed to
reassure them by his matter-of-fact explanations, and his cheerful
common sense. While he could not convince them that they had been
needlessly alarmed, he drew their attention to other things, by stories
of college life and experiences at the North, while Sheba bustled about,
bringing out the best of her meagre store to do him honor.

Ivy, scrubbed until she shone, and in a stiffly starched apron, sat on
his knee and sucked her thumb. Bud squatted at his feet in silence,
sticking his little red tongue in and out of the hole where the lost
tooth had been. As for John Jay, his hero-worship passed that night into
warmest love. From that time on, he would have gone through fire and
water to serve his "Rev'und Gawge,"--anywhere in fact, save one place.
Never any more was there motive deep enough or power strong enough to
drag him within calling distance of the gander thicket.




CHAPTER VII.


Now that berry picking was at an end, John Jay slipped back into his old
lazy ways. Errands were run with lagging feet; work was done in the
easiest way possible, and everything was left undone that he could by
any means avoid. Mammy scolded when she came home at night and found
both water-pail and wood-box empty, but he went serenely on with his
supper. No matter what happened, nothing ever interfered with his
appetite.

"Those chillun are gettin' as bad as little young turkeys 'bout strayin'
away from home," mumbled Aunt Susan one morning, as she watched them
slip through the fence soon after Sheba had left the house. "An' they
ain't anything wussah than young turkeys for runnin' off. 'Peahs like
that kind of poultry is nevah satisfied with where they is, but always
want to be where they isn't. It's the same with those chillun."

Although Aunt Susan did not know it, there was one place where John Jay
and his flock of two were always content to stay; that was on the steps
at the side door of the church. Nearly every afternoon found them
sitting there in a solemn row, waiting for the shadows to grow long
across the grass, for it was then that George oftenest came to play on
the organ. He always smiled on the three grave little figures, waiting
so patiently for the music of his vesper hymns.

It touched the lonely man to have John Jay follow him about, with that
same wistful look in his eyes that a faithful dog has for its master.
Sometimes he sat down on the steps beside the children and talked to
them awhile, just to see the boy's face light up with pleasure.

It was a mystery to Sheba, how a dignified minister could care for the
companionship of such a harum-scarum little creature as her grandson.
She did know the tie that bound them, but their natures were as near
akin as the acorn and the oak. In John Jay the man saw his own childhood
with all its unanswered questions and dumb, groping ambitions; while the
boy, looking up to his "Rev'und Gawge" as the highest standard of all
manliness, felt faint stirrings within, of the possibility of such
growth for himself.

Early one morning George sent a message to Sheba, asking that John Jay
might be allowed to spend the day with him and help watch the toll-gate,
while Mars' Nat was in town. That morning still stands out in the boy's
memory, as one of the happiest he ever spent.

Along in the middle of the afternoon, when travel on the turnpike had
almost ceased on account of the heat, George went into his room and lay
down. John Jay sat on the floor of the porch, holding the old hound's
head in his lap, and lazily smoothing its long soft ears. He felt very
important when a wagon rattled up and the toll was dropped into his
fingers. He wished that everybody he knew would ride by and find him
sitting there in charge; but no one else came for more than an hour. It
had seemed as long as ten hours, with nothing to do but slap at the
flies and talk to the sleepy hound. John Jay grinned when he saw the
arrival, for it was a man whom he knew.

"Good evenin', Mistah Boden," he called, eagerly. The man stopped his
horses.

"Hello!" he said. "You're in charge, are you? Where's the rest of the
folks?"

"Mars' Nat, he's gone to town to-day," answered John Jay, proudly. "I'm
keepin' toll-gate this evenin', Mistah Boden."

"So!" exclaimed the man, with a cunning gleam in his little eyes.
"That's the lay of the land, is it?"

Instead of taking out his pocket-book, he threw one foot over his knee,
and began to ask questions in a friendly manner that flattered John Jay.

"Let's see. Your name's Hickman, hain't it?"

"Yessa, John Jay Hickman," answered the boy.

"Yes," drawled the man, gnawing at a plug of tobacco which he took from
his pocket. "I know all about you. Your mammy used to cook for my wife,
and your gran'mammy washed at our house one summer. How is the old
woman, anyhow?"

"She's well, thank you, Mistah Boden," was the pleased answer.

"And then there's that brother of her's--Billy! old Uncle Billy! How's
he getting on?"

"Oh, he's mighty complainin', Mistah Boden; he's got such a misery in
his back all the time that he say he jus' aint got ambition 'nuff to get
out'n his own way."

"Is that so?" was the reply, in a tone of flattering interest. The man
beckoned him with his whip to step closer.

"Look here, boy," he said, in a confidential tone, "it's a mighty lucky
thing for me that Nat Chadwick left you here instead of a stranger.
Every penny of change I started with this morning dropped out through a
hole in my pocket somewhere. I didn't find it out until I got within
sight of the place; then, thinks I to myself, 'oh, it won't make any
difference. Nat and I are old friends; he'll pass me.' I guess you can
do the same, can't you, being as you're in his place, and I'm an old
friend of your family? You needn't say anything about it, and I'll do as
much for you some day."

John Jay looked puzzled. Before he could reply George walked out on the
porch and stood beside him. He bowed to the man politely. "I'll take the
toll, if you please, Mr. Boden. Put up the bar, John."

The man hesitated a moment, then tossed him the change, and gave the
horses a cut with his whip that sent them dashing down the road.

"If he wasn't jus' tryin' to sneak his way through 'thout payin'!"
exclaimed John Jay, indignantly. George made no comment, but John Jay
seemed unable to quit talking about the occurrence. Half an hour later
he broke out again: "He thought 'cause I was jus' a little boy he could
cheat me, an' nobody would evah know the difference. I nevah in all my
life befo' heard tell of anything so mean!"

"Haven't you?" asked George, with such peculiar emphasis and such a
queer little smile that John Jay felt guilty, although he could not have
told why.

"No, I nevah did," he insisted.

George leaned against the door-casing, and looked thoughtfully across
the fields. "There are more turnpikes in life than one, my boy," he said
kindly, "and every one has its toll-gate. There is the road to learning.
I gave up everything to get through that gate, even my health. One
cannot be anything or do anything worth while without paying some sort
of toll. It may be time or strength or hard work or patience, and
sometimes we have to give them all."

"'Peahs like I've nevah struck any such roads in my travellin',"
answered John Jay, carelessly, who often understood George's little
parables far better than he cared to acknowledge.

"But I know one road that you are on now, where you try to slip out of
paying what you owe every day."

John Jay hung his head, and rubbed his bare feet together in embarrassed
silence. If the Reverend George said it was so, it must be so, although
he did not know just what he was hinting at.

"Mr. Boden knows very well," continued George, "that the money that is
paid here goes to keep the road in good condition for him to travel
over. He is very glad to have such a good pike provided for him, but he
wants it for nothing. I know a poor old woman who keeps the road smooth
for somebody. She works early and late, in hot weather and cold, to earn
food and shelter and clothes for somebody; and that somebody eats her
bread, and wears out the clothes, and sleeps under her roof, and never
pays any toll. He owes her thanks and willing service,--all the help he
can give her poor, tired old body, but she never gets even the thanks.
He takes all her drudgery as a matter of course."

John Jay's head dropped lower and lower, as he screwed his toes around
in the dust of the path, mortified and embarrassed. All the whippings of
his life had never stung him so deeply as George's quiet words. He was
used to being scolded for his laziness. He never paid any attention to
that; but to have his "Rev'und Gawge" regard him as dishonest as Mr.
Boden hurt him more than words could express.

Another wagon came rattling up in a cloud of dust. Without waiting to
see the newcomer, he dodged around the corner of the house and ran down
to the barn. A pair of puppies came frisking out ready for a romp, and
an old Maltese cat, stretched out in the sun, stood up and arched its
back at his approach. He took no notice of them, but crawling up into
the hay, threw himself down in a dark corner with his face hidden in his
arms.

Mars' Nat came home after awhile. John Jay could hear Ned putting the
horse into the stall, and throwing the corn into the feed-box. Then
everything was still for a long time. The sun stole through the cracks
of the barn in wide shining streaks, with little motes of dust dancing
up and down in the golden light, but John Jay did not see them. A shadow
darkened the doorway. He did not see that, for his face was still
hidden. There was a step on the barn floor, and a rustling in the hay
beside him; then George's hand rested lightly on his head, and his voice
said, soothingly, "There, there! I wouldn't cry about it."

"Oh, I nevah thought about things that way befo'!" sobbed John Jay.
"I'll nevah sneak out of the work again. I'll tote the wood and watah
'thout waitin' to be asked, an' I'll nevah lick out my tongue at her
behine her back as long as I live!"

George bit his lips to keep from laughing, although he was touched by
the little penitent's distress.

"Do you know why I said such hard things to you?" he asked. "It was to
open your eyes. I want to make a man of you, John Jay. Let me tell you
some things about your grandmother that you have never heard. Her whole
life has been a struggle, and such a very sad one."

John Jay rubbed his shirt sleeve across his eyes and gave a final
snuffle. Some people never have the awakening that came to him that
afternoon. Some people go along all their days with no other thought in
life than to burrow through their own mole-hills. There in the hay, with
the shining dust of the sunbeams falling athwart the old barn floor, the
boy lay and listened. Thoughts that he had no words for, ambitions that
he could not express, yet that filled him with vague longing, seemed to
vibrate along the earnest voice, and tremble from the fulness of
George's heart into his. Even after George stopped talking and began to
whistle softly in the pause that followed, John Jay lay quite still with
his face hidden in his arms.

Ned came in presently, rustling around through the hay after eggs, and
singing at the top of his voice. The sound seemed to bring John Jay back
to his common every-day self. He sat up, grinning as if he had never
heard of such things as tears; but those he had shed must have made his
eyesight clearer. As he slid down from the hay and walked along beside
George, he noticed for the first time how slow and faltering the steps
beside his had grown. As they climbed up the hill to the church, it
seemed to him that the beloved face looked unusually thin and haggard in
the strong light of the sunset.

George did not play long this evening. He knew that the quiet little
listener on the steps bent as readily to the changing moods of his
melody as the clover does to the fitful breezes; so he changed abruptly
from the minor chords that his fingers instinctively reached for, to an
old hymn that smoothed away the pathetic pucker of the boy's forehead.
Then he pulled out the stops and began a loud burst of martial music, so
glad and triumphant, that, listening, one felt all great things possible
of achievement. John Jay stood up, swinging his cap on the end of a
stick which he carried, with all the curves and rythmic motions of a
drum major.

After George came out and locked the door, he stood for a moment looking
out fondly across the peaceful fields, still fair with the fading glow
of the summer sun. John Jay looked too, feeling at the same time the
touch of a caressing hand laid lightly on his bare head, but he could
not see the lips above him that moved in a silent benediction.

When Mammy came home that night, there was wood in the box and water in
the pail. The loose boards lying around the yard had been piled up
neatly, and the paths were freshly swept. All that evening John Jay's
eyes followed her with curious glances whichever way she turned, as if
he found her changed. The change was in John Jay.

Next day, when she came home, she found the same state of affairs. It
was early in the afternoon, and the children were out playing. She hung
up her sun-bonnet, and dropped wearily down into a chair. Then,
remembering a pile of clothes that must be mended before dark, she got
up and began to hunt for her thimble and thread.

"That tawmentin' boy must have lost 'em," she exclaimed, after a vain
search through her work-basket. The clothes were lying on the bed where
she had put them. As she gathered them in her arms the thimble rolled
out, and a spool of thread with a needle sticking in it fell to the
floor.

[Illustration: George came out and locked the door]

She shook out Ivy's little blue dress, and began turning it around to
find the seam that was ripped. It was drawn together with queer
straggling stitches that only the most awkward of fingers could have
made. The white buttons on Bud's shirt-waist had been sewed on with
black thread, and a spot of blood told where somebody's thumb had felt
the sharp thrust of a needle. John Jay's trousers lay at the bottom of
the pile, with a little round, puckered patch of calico on each knee.

The tears came into Mammy's eyes as she saw the boy's poor attempt to
help. "I'se afeerd he's goin' to die," she muttered in alarm. "I
sut'n'ly is. Poah little fellow: he's mighty tryin' to a body's patience
sometimes, an' he's made a mess of this mendin', for suah, but I reckon
he means all right. He's not so onthinkin' an' onthankful aftah all."
She laid the spool and thimble on the window-sill, and folded her hands
to rest awhile. There was a tremulous smile on her careworn old face.
For one day, at least, John Jay had paid his toll.




CHAPTER VIII.


Boys do not grow into saints in a single night, in the way that Jack's
beanstalk grew from earth to sky. Sainthood comes slowly, like the
blossom on a century plant; there must be a hundred years of thorny
stem-life first.

Mammy soon lost all her fears of John Jay's dying. Although the promise
made to George on the haymow was faithfully kept, he could no more avoid
getting into mischief than a weathercock can keep from turning when the
wind blows.

The October frosts came, sweetening the persimmons and ripening the nuts
in the hazel copse; but it nipped the children's bare feet, and made the
thinly clad little shoulders shiver. John Jay gladly shuffled into the
old clothes sent over from Rosehaven. They were many sizes too big, but
he turned back the coat sleeves and hitched up his suspenders,
regardless of appearances. Bud fared better, for the suit that fell to
his lot was but slightly worn, and almost fitted him. As for Ivy, she
was decked out in such finery that the boys scarcely dared to touch her.
She had been given a long blue velvet cloak that the youngest Haven
could no longer squeeze into. It was trimmed with shaggy fur that had
once been white. Ivy admired it so much that when she was not wearing it
out of doors she was carrying it around in the house in a big roll, as
tenderly as if it had been a great doll.

It was an odd little procession that filed past Uncle Billy's house
every day, on the way to the woods for autumn stores. John Jay came
first, with a rickety wagon he had made out of a soap-box and two solid
wooden wheels. He looked like a little old man, with his long coat and
turned up trowsers. Bud came next in his new suit, but he had lost his
hat, and was obliged to wear a handkerchief tied over his ears. Ivy
brought up the rear, continually tripping on her long cloak, and jolting
her white toboggan cap down over her eyes at almost every step.

Nuts and persimmons and wild fox-grapes filled the little wagon many
times, and made a welcome addition to Mammy's meagre bill of fare.

Late one evening John Jay came running up the path all out of breath.
The yellow candle-light streamed out through the cabin window. He
stopped and looked in, sniffing the air with keen enjoyment, for Mammy
was stewing the rabbit he had caught that morning in a snare.

He could see Bud sitting on the floor, with his feet harnessed up as
horses. He was sawing the reins back and forth and remorselessly
switching his own legs until they flew up and down in fine style. John
Jay watched him with a grin on his face.

Presently Mammy, turning to season the stew, saw the black face pressed
close against the window-pane. With a startled shriek she gave the
pepper-pot such a shake that the lid flew off, and nearly all of the
pepper went into the stew.

"Jus' see what you done!" she scolded, as John Jay walked into the house
an instant later. "Next time you come gawkin' in the window at me in the
dark, I'll peppah _you_ 'stid o' the rabbit!"

John Jay hastened to change the subject. "I sole a bushel of hickory
nuts to Mistah Bemis jus' now," he stammered, "an' he's goin' to take
some mo' next week. I'm savin' up to get you all somethin' mighty nice
for Chrismus." He jingled his pockets suggestively; but Mammy was too
busy skimming the pepper out of the stew to make any reply.

       *       *       *       *       *

One warm, mellow afternoon when the golden-rod was at its sunniest, and
the iron-weed flaunted its royal purple across the fields in the trail
of the Indian summer, John Jay went down to the toll-gate cottage. He
found his Reverend George sitting on the porch in his overcoat, with a
shawl thrown over his knees. A book lay in his lap, but his hands were
folded on the open pages, and he was looking far away across the brown
fields of tattered corn-stalks. He was much better than he had been for
several weeks, and welcomed John Jay so gaily, that the child felt that
a weight had somehow been lifted from him. Mammy and Uncle Billy had
been whispering together many times of late, and the little listener
shared their fears. He had made so many visits to the toll-gate since
the day he was left in charge, that he felt almost as much at home there
as Mars' Nat himself. Once George did all the talking while John Jay
listened with his head bashfully tipped to one side; now they seemed to
have changed places. It was George who listened.

John Jay had been kept at home for several days, and had much to tell.
For an hour or more he entertained George with accounts of his rabbit
snares, his nutting expeditions, and his persimmon hunts. He told about
the dye Mammy had made from the sumach berries which he had carried
home, and how Ivy had dropped her pet duck into it. He imitated Bud's
antics when he upset the kettle of soft soap, and he had much to say
about the young owl which they had caught, and caged under a wash-tub.

He did not notice that he was doing all the talking this afternoon, but
filled the pauses that sometimes fell between them by idly playing
jack-stones with a handful of acorns. George was thinking as they sat
there that this might be the last time that they two would ever sit in
this way together, and he was searching for some words with which to
prepare the child for a sudden leave-taking in case it should be soon.

At last he cleared his throat. John Jay looked up expectantly, but just
then Mars' Nat walked around the house.

"Here comes Doctor Leonard," he said, nodding towards a rapidly
approaching horseman. "Howdy, Doc," he called, as the man drew rein, and
felt in his pocket for some change to pay his toll. "What's your hurry?"

"I've a call over to Elk Ridge," he answered, handing him the money and
quickly starting on. Then he pulled his horse up with a sudden jerk.
"Here, Chadwick," he called, pitching the heavy overcoat he carried on
his arm in the direction of the porch, "I wish you'd keep this for me
until I get back. I'll be along this way before dark, and it's so much
warmer than I thought it would be that such a heavy coat is a nuisance."

"All right," responded the toll-keeper. "Here! John Jay," he ordered, as
the doctor disappeared around the bend in the road, "pick up the
gentleman's coat and hang it on a chair inside the door there." Then he
stuck his hands in his pockets, and whistling to his dog, walked off
across the fields.

George turned to the child again. "John Jay," he said, "do you know that
I'm going away soon?" Without waiting for an answer, he hurried on, lest
another spell of coughing should interrupt him. "When I was a little
fellow like you I heard so much about spirits and graveyards and haunted
places that I had a horror of dying. I could not think of it without a
shiver. But I've found out that death isn't a cold, ugly thing, my boy,
and I want you to remember all your life every word I'm saying to you
now. There is nothing to dread in simply going down this road and
through the gate as Doctor Leonard did, and death is no more than that.
We just go down the turnpike till we get to the end of this life, and
then there's the toll-gate. We lay down our old worn-out bodies, just as
Doctor Leonard left his coat here, because he wouldn't need it farther
up the road. Then the bar flies up and lets us through. It drops so
quickly that no one ever sees what lies on the other side, but we know
that there is neither sorrow nor crying beyond it, nor any more pain.
Listen, John Jay, this is what the Book tells us."

With fingers that trembled in his eagerness to make himself understood,
he lifted the volume that had been lying in his lap. The words that he
read vibrated through the child's heart in the way that the organ music
used to roll. Never again in the years that followed could he hear them
read without seeing all the golden glory of that radiant October day,
and hearing the mournful notes of some distant dove, falling at
intervals through the Sabbath-like stillness.

He had a queer conception of what lies beyond the gates of this life. It
was a curious jumble of crowns and harps and long, white-feathered
wings. Mammy's favorite song said, "There's milk an' honey in heaven, I
know;" and Aunt Susan often lifted up her cracked voice in the refrain,
"Oh, them golden slippahs I'm agwine to wear, when Gabriel blows his
trum-pet!" How Uncle Billy could sigh for the time to come when he might
walk the shining pavements was beyond John Jay's understanding.
Personally, he preferred the freedom of the neighboring woods and the
pleasure of digging in the dirt to all the white robes and crowns that
might be laid up somewhere in the skies.

But when George had finished reading, John Jay was not gazing into the
clouds for a glimpse of the city to which his friend was going; he was
looking down the road. Crowned with all their autumn glory, the far
hills stood up fair and golden in the westering sun. It was to some
place just as real and beautiful as the hills he looked upon that George
was going, not a crowded street with an endless procession of singing,
white-robed figures. A far country, under whose waving trees health and
strength would be given back to him. No, dying was not a cold, ugly
thing.

"_They shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and sighing shall flee
away!_"

George closed the book, and leaning wearily back in the chair, drew his
hand over his eyes. "I want you to promise me one thing, John Jay," he
said. "That when I am gone you will think of what I am telling you now,
and when the colored people all gather around to see this tired body of
mine laid aside, you'll remember Dr. Leonard's coat, and you'll say,
'George has left his behind too. He isn't here, but he's just on the
other side of the toll-gate.' Will you do that, John Jay?"

There was a frightened look in the boy's eyes. He had no words
wherewith to answer him, but he nodded an assent as he went on nervously
tossing the acorns from one hand to another.

There was a long silence, and when he looked up inquiringly, George had
put his thin hands over his face to hide the tears that were slowly
trickling down.

"What's the mattah?" he asked anxiously. "Shall I call Mars' Nat?"

"No," answered the man, steadying his voice. "I was only thinking that I
had expected to go through the gate, when my turn came, with my arms
piled full of sheaves,--but I've come to the end too soon. It seems so
hard to come down to death empty-handed, when I have longed all these
years to do so much for my people. Oh, my poor people!" he cried out
desperately; "so helpless and so needy, and my life that was to have
been given to them going out in vain! utterly in vain!"

It was not the first time that John Jay had heard that cry. In these
weeks of constant companionship George had talked so much of his hopes
and plans, that a faint spark of that same ambition had begun to
smoulder slowly in the boy's ignorant little heart. Six months ago he
could have had no understanding of such a grief as now made George's
voice to tremble; but love had opened his eyes to many things, and made
his sympathies keen. He drew nearer, saying almost in a whisper: "But
Uncle Billy says you fought a good fight while you was gettin' ready to
help us cul'ud folks, an' if you got so knocked up you can't do nothin'
moah, maybe 'twon't be expected as you should have yo' hands full when
you go through the gates. You've got yo' scars to show for what you've
done."

George lifted up his head. There was an eager light in his eyes, not so
much because of the comfort that had come from such an unexpected
quarter, as because of a new hope that the words suggested. He lifted
the boy's chin with a trembling hand, and looked wistfully into his
eyes.

"You could do it, couldn't you?" he asked. "All that I must leave
undone? The struggle would not be so great for you. There are schools
near at hand now. You would not have the fearful odds to contend with
that I had. _Will_ you take up my battle? Shall I leave you my sword,
John Jay? Oh, you _do_ understand me, don't you?" he cried, imploringly.

"Yes, I understand," answered the boy. Then, as if George had really
placed an epaulet upon his shoulder, as if he had really given him a
sword, he drew a long breath and said with all the solemnity of a
promise: "Some day Uncle Billy shall say that about me, 'He have fought
a good fight,--he have finished his co'se.'"

[Illustration: Swords]




[Illustration: Tollgate (up)]




CHAPTER IX.


It came to pass as George had said. One cold, rainy day when the wind
rustled the fallen leaves and sighed through all the bare branches, he
came haltingly up to the end of his lonely pilgrimage. It was given to
little John Jay to hold his hand and look into his eyes as Death swung
up the bar and bade him pass on.

A wondering smile flitted across the beloved face; then that mysterious
silence that bars all sight and speech fell between the freed spirit
hastening up the eternal highway and the trembling boy left sobbing
behind.

Mars' Nat turned away with tears in his eyes and looked out of the
window. "Through thick and thin, he's the one soul who loved me and
believed in me," he said, in a half whisper. "His poor, black hands
have upheld the old family standards and ideals far more faithfully than
mine, both in his slavery and his freedom."

Because of this there was no grave made for George in the forsaken
shadow of Brier Crook church. He was given a place on the hill, beside
the Chadwicks, whose name he had borne unsullied, and to whose honor he
had been proudly loyal.

"That was a gran' funeral occasion, sis' Sheba," exclaimed Aunt Susan,
as she took off the rusty crape veil that had served at the funerals of
two generations. "I reckon every cul'ud person around heah was present.
Three ministahs a helpin', an' fo'teen white families sendin' flowahs
with their cards on isn't to be seen every day in the yeah. I wouldn't
have missed it for anything."

"No, indeed," answered Mammy, with a mournful shake of the head. "Dyin'
would be somethin' to look forwa'ds to if we could all hope for such a
buryin' as that. But I'm beat about John Jay. He do seem so onfeelin'.
He loved that man bettah than anything on this yearth, an' I s'posed
he'd take his death mighty hard; but what you reckon he said to me this
mawnin'. I was i'onin' my black aidged handkerchief to take, when he
says to me, sezee, 'What you want to put on mo'nin' for Rev'und Gawge
for? He said to tell you all that he jus' gone through the toll-gate.'"

"You don't tell me!" exclaimed Aunt Susan. "That sut'n'ly sounds
on-natchel in a chile like him."

"Yes," continued Mammy, "I haven't seen him shed a tear. He jus' wandahs
around the yard, same as if nothin' had happened, and nevah says a word
about it."

[Illustration: Sat alone by the church steps]

She did not know how many times he slipped away from the other children
and sat alone by the church steps, where he had so often listened to
George's vesper melodies. She did not know what mournful cadences of
memory thrilled him, as he rocked himself back and forth among the dead
weeds, with his arms around his knees and his head bowed on them. She
knew nothing of the music that had sung wordless longings into his
simple child-heart until it awakened answering voices of a deathless
ambition. So her surprise knew no bounds when he came slowly into the
cabin one evening, and asked if he might be allowed to start to
school the following week.

"Law, chile!" she answered. "They isn't any school for cul'ud folks
less'n a mile an' a half away, an' besides, you hasn't clothes fitten to
wear. The scholars would all laugh at you."

Still he persisted. "What put such a notion in yo' head, anyhow?" she
demanded.

John Jay turned his face aside, and busied himself with taking another
reef in his suspenders. "The Rev'und Gawge wanted me to go," he said, in
a low tone. "Besides, how can I know what all's in the books he done
left me 'thout I learn to read?"

"That's so," assented Mammy, looking proudly at the shelves now
ornamenting one corner of the little cabin with George's well-worn
school-books. Most of the volumes were upside down, because her
untutored eyes knew no better than to replace them so, when she took
them out to dust them with loving care. They were George's greatest
treasures, and she allowed no one to touch them, not even John Jay, to
whom they had been left.

"What does a little niggah like him want of schoolin'," she had once
said to Uncle Billy, when he had proposed sending the boy to school to
keep him out of mischief. "Why, that John Jay he hasn't got any mo' mind
than a grasshoppah. All he knows how to do is jus' to keep on a jumpin'.
No, brer Billy, it would be a pure waste of good education to spend it
on anybody like him."

John Jay had always cheerfully agreed with this opinion, which she never
hesitated to express in his hearing. He had had no desire to give up his
unlettered liberty until that day on the haymow when he had his
awakening. Having heard Mammy's opinion so often, it was no wonder that
he kept his head turned bashfully aside, and stumbled over his words
when he timidly made his request. It was the sight of George's books
that gave him courage to persist, and it was the sight of the books that
decided Mammy's answer. She could remember the time when Jintsey's boy
had been almost as light-headed and light-hearted as John Jay; so it was
not past belief that even John Jay might settle down in time.

The thought that he might some day be able to read the books that George
had pored over, and that, possibly, some time in the far future he
might be fitted to preach the gospel George had proclaimed, aroused all
her grandmotherly pride. Some fragment of a half-forgotten sermon
floated through her mind as she looked on the ragged little fellow
standing before her.

"The mantle of the prophet 'Lijah done fell on his servant 'Lisha," she
muttered under her breath. "What if the mantle of Gawge Chadwick have
been left to my poah Ellen's boy, 'long with them books?"

John Jay was balancing himself on one foot, while he drew the toes of
the other along a crack in the floor between the puncheons, anxiously
awaiting her decision. Not knowing what was passing through her mind, he
was not prepared for the abrupt change in both her speech and manner. He
almost lost his balance when she suddenly gave her consent; but,
regaining it quickly, he tumbled through the door, giving vent to his
delight in a series of whoops that made Mammy's head ring, and brought
her to the door, scolding crossly.

A few minutes later, a dusky little figure crept through the gloaming,
and rustled softly through the leaves lying on the path. Resting his
arms on the fence, he looked across the dim fields to the darkly
outlined tree-tops of the hill beyond.

"I wondah if he knows that I'm keepin' my promise," he whispered. "I
wondah if he knows I'm tryin' to follow him."

Over the churchyard hill the new moon swung its slender crescent of
light, and into its silvery wake there trembled out of the darkness a
shining star.

       *       *       *       *       *

The roadside ditches are covered with ice, these cold winter mornings.
The ruts in the muddy pike are frozen as hard as stone. John Jay
shuffles along in his big shoes on his way to school, out at the toes
and out at his elbows; but there is a broad smile all over his bright
little face. Wherever he can find a strip of ice to slide across, he
goes with a rush and a whoop. Sometimes there is only a raw turnip and a
piece of corn pone in his pocket for dinner. His feet and fingers are
always numb with cold by the time he reaches the school house, but his
eyes still shine, and his whistle never loses its note of cheeriness.

There are whippings and scoldings in the schoolhouse, just as there have
always been whippings and scoldings in the cabin; for no sooner is he
thawed out after his long walk, than he begins to be the worry of his
teacher's life, as he was the torment of Mammy's. It is not that he
means to make trouble. Despite his many blunders into mischief, he is
always at the head of his class, for he has a motive for hard study that
the other pupils know nothing of.

Every evening Bud and Ivy watch for his home-coming with eager faces
flattened against the cabin window, lit up by the red glare of the
sunset. They see him come running up the road, snapping his cold
fingers, and turning occasional handsprings into the snow-drifts in the
fence corners.

Just before he comes whistling up the path with his face twisted into
all sorts of ugly grimaces to make them laugh, he stops at the gate a
moment. Do they wonder what he always sees across those snowy fields, as
he stands and looks away towards Mars' Nat's cottage and the white
churchyard on the hill?

Ah, Bud and Ivy have not had their awakening; but the little brother and
sister are not the only ones who fail to see more than the surface of
John Jay's nature. Under the bubbles of his gay animal spirits runs the
deep current of a strong purpose, and in these moments he is keeping
silent tryst with a memory. He thinks of his promise, and his heart goes
out to his Reverend George on the other side of the toll-gate.


THE END.



[Illustration: Tollgate (down)]



     *     *     *     *     *     *     *



Transcriber's notes:

   Page 51 Briar Crook church changed to Brier Crook church for
   consistency.

   All other spelling as found in original.

   Descriptions added to illustrations without captions.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OLE MAMMY'S TORMENT***


******* This file should be named 17497.txt or 17497.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/1/7/4/9/17497



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

