The Project Gutenberg EBook of Nouveau moyen de préparer la couche
sensible des plaques destinées à recevoir les images photographiques, by Louis-Jacques-Mandé Daguerre

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Nouveau moyen de préparer la couche sensible des plaques destinées à recevoir les images photographiques
       Lettre à M. Arago

Author: Louis-Jacques-Mandé Daguerre

Release Date: July 11, 2005 [EBook #16260]

Language: French

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOUVEAU MOYEN DE PRÉPARER LA ***




Produced by Carlo Traverso, Melissa Er-Raqabi and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team. This file was produced
from images generously made available by the Bibliothèque
nationale de France (BnF/Gallica)






NOUVEAU MOYEN
DE
PRÉPARER LA COUCHE SENSIBLE DES PLAQUES
DESTINÉES A RECEVOIR LES
IMAGES PHOTOGRAPHIQUES,
PAR M. DAGUERRE.

LETTRE A M. ARAGO.


PARIS,
BACHELIER, IMPRIMEUR-LIBRAIRE
DU BUREAU DES LONGITUDES, DE L'ÉCOLE POLYTECHNIQUE, ETC.,
QUAI DES AUGUSTINS, 55.

1844.




NOUVEAU MOYEN
DE
PRÉPARER LA COUCHE SENSIBLE DES PLAQUES
DESTINÉES A RECEVOIR
LES IMAGES PHOTOGRAPHIQUES.




LETTRE A M. ARAGO.


Vous avez bien voulu annoncer à l'Académie que j'étais arrivé, par une
suite d'expériences, à reconnaître d'une manière certaine que, dans
l'état actuel de mon procédé, la couche sensible à la lumière étant trop
mince, elle ne pouvait fournir toute la dégradation de teintes
nécessaire pour reproduire la nature avec relief et fermeté; en effet,
quoique les épreuves obtenues jusqu'à ce jour ne manquent pas de pureté,
elles laissent, à quelques exceptions près, beaucoup à désirer sous le
rapport de l'effet général et du modelé[1].

C'est en superposant sur la plaque plusieurs métaux, en les y réduisant
en poussière par le frottement et en acidulant les espaces vides que
laissent leurs molécules, que je suis parvenu à développer des actions
galvaniques qui permettent l'emploi d'une couche d'iodure beaucoup plus
épaisse sans avoir à redouter, pendant l'opération de la lumière dans la
chambre noire, l'influence de l'iode devenu libre.

La nouvelle combinaison que j'emploie, et qui se compose de plusieurs
iodures métalliques, a l'avantage de donner une couche sensible qui se
laisse impressionner simultanément par toutes les valeurs de ton, et
j'obtiens ainsi, dans un très-court espace de temps, la représentation
d'objets vivement éclairés avec des demi-teintes qui conservent toutes,
comme dans la nature, leur transparence et leur valeur relative.

En ajoutant l'or aux métaux dont je me servais d'abord, je suis parvenu
à aplanir la grande difficulté que présentait l'usage du brome comme
substance accélératrice. On sait que les personnes très-exercées
pouvaient seules employer le brome avec succès et qu'elles n'arrivaient
à obtenir le maximum de sensibilité que par hasard, puisque ce point est
impossible à déterminer très-précisément, et qu'immédiatement au delà le
brome attaque l'argent et s'oppose à la formation de l'image[2].

Avec mon nouveau moyen, la couche d'iodure est toujours saturée de
brome, puisqu'on peut laisser sans inconvénient la plaque exposée à la
vapeur de cette substance la moitié au moins du temps nécessaire; car
l'application de la couche d'or s'oppose à la formation de ce qu'on
appelle _le voile de brome_. Il ne faut cependant pas abuser de cette
facilité, car la couche d'or, étant très-mince, pourrait être attaquée,
surtout si on l'avait trop usée par le polissage[3]. On trouvera
peut-être le procédé que je vais donner un peu compliqué; mais, malgré
le désir que j'avais de le simplifier autant que possible, j'ai été au
contraire conduit, par les résultats de mes expériences, à multiplier
les substances employées qui, toutes, jouent un rôle important dans
l'ensemble du procédé. Je les regarde comme étant toutes nécessaires
pour obtenir un résultat complet, et cela doit être, puisque ce n'est
que graduellement que je suis arrivé à découvrir les propriétés de ces
différents métaux, dont l'un aide à la promptitude, l'autre à la vigueur
de l'épreuve, etc.[4].

Il naît du concours de ces substances une puissance qui neutralise tous
les effets inconnus qui venaient si souvent s'opposer à la formation de
l'image[5].

Je crois d'ailleurs que la science et l'art ne doivent pas être arrêtés
par la considération d'une manipulation plus ou moins longue; on doit se
croire heureux d'obtenir à ce prix de beaux résultats, surtout lorsque
les moyens d'exécution sont faciles.

Car la préparation galvanique de la plaque ne présente aucune
difficulté. L'opération se divise en deux parties principales: la
première, qui est la plus longue, peut être faite très-longtemps à
l'avance, et peut être considérée comme le complément de la fabrication
de la plaque. Cette opération une fois faite, sert indéfiniment, et l'on
peut, sans la recommencer, faire un grand nombre d'épreuves sur la même
plaque.


_Désignation des nouvelles substances._

Solution aqueuse de bichlorure de mercure (sublimé corrosif);

Solution de cyanure de mercure;

Huile de pétrole blanche acidulée avec de l'acide nitrique;

Dissolution de chlorure d'or et de platine.


_Préparation des substances._

_Solution aqueuse de bichlorure de mercure (sublimé corrosif)._--5
décigrammes de bichlorure de mercure dans 700 grammes d'eau distillée.

_Solution de cyanure de mercure_.--On sature un flacon d'eau distillée
de cyanure de mercure, et l'on en décante un volume quelconque, que l'on
allonge d'une égale quantité d'eau distillée.

_Huile de pétrole blanche acidulée_[6].--On acidule cette huile en y
mêlant un dixième d'acide nitrique pur, qu'on y laisse au moins
quarante-huit heures, en ayant soin d'agiter le flacon de temps en
temps. On décante l'huile qui s'est acidulée, et qui rougit alors
fortement le papier de tournesol. Elle s'est aussi un peu colorée, tout
en restant très-limpide.

_Dissolution de chlorure d'or et de platine._--Pour ne pas multiplier
les dissolutions, j'ai pris pour point de départ le chlorure d'or
ordinaire, qui sert à fixer les épreuves. On sait qu'il est composé de
_1 gramme de chlorure d'or et de 4 grammes d'hyposulfite de soude pour 1
litre d'eau distillée_.

Quant au chlorure de platine, il faut en faire dissoudre 2-1/2
décigrammes dans 3 litres d'eau distillée; on mêle ensuite ces deux
dissolutions en égales quantités.


MANIÈRE D'OPÉRER.

_Première préparation de la plaque._

_Nota._--Pour être plus court dans la description qui va suivre,
j'indiquerai chaque substance en abrégé. Ainsi je dirai, pour désigner
la _solution aqueuse de bichlorure de mercure_, sublimé; pour la
_solution de cyanure de mercure_, cyanure; pour l'_huile de pétrole
acidulée_, huile; pour la _dissolution de chlorure d'or et de platine_,
or et platine; et pour l'_oxyde de fer_, rouge seulement.

On polit la plaque avec du sublimé et du tripoli d'abord, et ensuite
avec du rouge[7], jusqu'à ce qu'on arrive à un beau noir. Puis, on pose
la plaque sur le plan horizontal et on y verse la solution de cyanure
que l'on chauffe avec la lampe, absolument comme si l'on fixait une
épreuve au chlorure d'or. Le mercure se dépose et forme une couche
blanchâtre. On laisse un peu refroidir la plaque, et après avoir
renversé le liquide, on la sèche en la frottant avec du coton et en la
saupoudrant de rouge.

Il s'agit maintenant de polir la couche blanchâtre déposée par le
mercure. Avec un tampon de coton imbibé d'huile et de rouge, on frotte
cette couche juste assez pour qu'elle devienne d'un beau noir. Ou
pourra, en dernier lieu, frotter assez fortement, mais avec du coton
seul, pour amincir le plus possible la couche acidulée.

Ensuite on place la plaque sur le plan horizontal et on y verse la
dissolution d'or et de platine. On chauffe comme à l'ordinaire; on
laisse refroidir et puis on renverse le liquide que l'on sèche, en
frottant légèrement avec du coton et du rouge.

Il faut faire cette opération avec soin, surtout lorsqu'on ne doit pas
continuer immédiatement l'épreuve; car autrement, on laisserait sur la
plaque des lignes de liquide, qu'il est toujours difficile de faire
disparaître. Par ce dernier frottage la plaque ne doit être que séchée
et non pas polie.

Ici se borne la première préparation de la plaque, celle qui peut être
faite longtemps à l'avance.


_Seconde préparation._

_Nota._ Je ne crois pas convenable de mettre entre cette opération et
l'iodage de la plaque un intervalle de plus de douze heures.

Nous avons laissé la plaque avec un dépôt d'or et de platine. Pour polir
cette couche métallique, il faut prendre avec un tampon de coton de
l'huile et du rouge, et frotter jusqu'à ce que la plaque redevienne
noire; et puis avec de l'alcool et du coton seulement, on enlève le plus
possible cette couche d'huile et de rouge.

Alors on frotte assez fortement, et en repassant plusieurs fois aux
mêmes endroits, la plaque avec du coton imprégné de cyanure. Comme cette
couche sèche très-promptement, elle pourrait laisser sur la plaque des
traces d'inégalité; pour éviter cela, il faut repasser le cyanure, et
pendant que la plaque est encore humide, avec un tampon imbibé d'un peu
d'huile on s'empresse de frotter sur toute la surface de la plaque, et
de mêler ainsi ces deux substances; puis, avec un tampon de coton sec,
on frotte pour unir et en même temps pour dessécher la plaque, en ayant
soin d'enlever du tampon de coton les parties qui s'humectent de cyanure
et d'huile. Enfin, comme le coton laisse encore des traces, on saupoudre
également la plaque d'un peu de rouge que l'on fait tomber en frottant
légèrement et en rond.

Ensuite, avec un tampon imprégné d'huile seulement, on frotte la plaque
également, et de manière à faire revenir le bruni du métal; et puis on
saupoudre avec du rouge, et l'on frotte très-légèrement en rond, de
manière à faire tomber tout le rouge qui entraîne avec lui la
surabondance de la couche acidulée[8].

Enfin, avec un tampon de coton un peu ferme, on frotte fortement pour
donner le dernier poli[9].

Il n'est pas nécessaire de renouveler souvent les tampons imbibés
d'huile et de rouge; il faut seulement les garantir de la poussière.

J'ai dit plus haut que la première préparation de la plaque peut servir
indéfiniment; mais on comprend que la seconde doit être modifiée selon
qu'on opère sur une plaque qui a reçu une épreuve fixée ou une non
fixée.


_Sur l'épreuve fixée._

Il faut enlever les taches laissées par l'eau du lavage, avec l'oxyde
rouge et de l'eau faiblement acidulée d'acide nitrique (à 2 degrés dans
cette saison, et moins dans l'été).

Ensuite, il faut polir la plaque avec de l'huile et du rouge pour
enlever toutes les traces de l'image qu'on efface.

On continue alors l'opération comme je viens de le dire plus haut pour
la seconde préparation de la plaque neuve et à partir de l'emploi de
l'alcool.


_Sur l'épreuve non fixée (mais dont la couche sensible a été enlevée
comme à l'ordinaire, dans l'hyposulfite de soude)._

D'abord, il faut frotter la plaque avec de l'alcool et du rouge pour
enlever les traces de l'huile qui a servi à faire l'épreuve précédente.

On continue ensuite comme il est indiqué plus haut pour la plaque
neuve, et à partir de l'emploi de l'alcool.


TABLEAU RÉSUMÉ DES OPÉRATIONS.

_Première préparation._

1°. _Sublimé corrosif_ avec _tripoli_ d'abord, et _rouge_ ensuite, pour
polir la plaque;

2°. _Cyanure de mercure chauffé_ et _séché_ avec du _coton_ et du
_rouge_;

3°. _Huile acidulée_ avec _rouge_ pour polir la couche de mercure;

4°. _Or et platine chauffé_ et _séché_ avec du _coton_ et du _rouge_.


_Seconde préparation._

5°. _Huile acidulée_ avec _rouge_ pour polir la couche d'or et de
platine;

6°. _Alcool absolu_ pour enlever le plus possible l'huile et le rouge;

7°. _Cyanure de mercure employé à froid_ et _frotté seulement_ avec du
_coton_;

8°. _Huile frottée assez fortement_ et _égalisée_ en dernier lieu avec
du _rouge saupoudré_.


_Sur l'épreuve fixée._

1°. _Acide nitrique_ à 2 degrés avec _rouge_ pour enlever les taches;

2°. _Huile_ avec _rouge_ pour enlever les traces d'image et pour polir.

Continuer ensuite comme plus haut, à partir du n°6, alcool, etc.


_Sur l'épreuve non fixée (dont la couche sensible a été enlevée avec
l'hyposulfite de soude)._

_Alcool_ avec _rouge_ pour enlever les traces d'huile, et continuer
comme plus haut, à partir du n°6, alcool, etc.


OBSERVATIONS.

_De l'iodage._

La couleur de l'épreuve dépend de la teinte que l'on donne à l'iodure
métallique. On peut donc la varier à volonté; cependant la couleur _rose
violâtre_ m'a paru la plus convenable.

Pour transmettre l'iode à la plaque, on peut remplacer la feuille de
carton par un plateau de faïence dont on aura usé l'émail. L'iode
transmis par ce moyen n'est pas décomposé.

Il est inutile, je dirai même nuisible, de chauffer la plaque avant de
l'exposer à la vapeur de l'iode.


_Du lavage à l'hyposulfite de soude._

Pour enlever la couche sensible, il ne faut pas que la dissolution
d'hyposulfite de soude soit trop forte, parce qu'alors elle voile les
vigueurs. 60 grammes d'hyposulfite suffisent pour 1 litre d'eau
distillée.


NOTES:

[1] Sur la plaque décapée au moyen de la couche d'eau, comme je l'ai
indiqué, on obtient très-rapidement des épreuves d'une grande finesse,
mais qui manquent aussi de modelé, à cause du peu d'épaisseur de la
couche sensible.

[2] Tout le monde sait que la vapeur sèche du brome est plus favorable
que celle qu'on obtient au moyen de l'eau bromée, car cette dernière a
l'inconvénient d'entraîner avec elle de l'humidité qui se condense à la
surface de la plaque. L'emploi de l'huile que j'indique plus loin
neutralise cet effet et donne à la vapeur du brome étendu d'eau la même
propriété qu'à celle du brome sec.

[3] Cela est tellement vrai que, si l'on fait une épreuve sur une plaque
qui a été fixée plusieurs fois, on peut la laisser à l'exposition de la
vapeur du brome autant de fois en plus du temps nécessaire qu'elle a
reçu de différentes couches d'or.

[4] Je veux dire seulement que l'emploi de tous les métaux que j'indique
plus loin est indispensable; mais la manière de les appliquer peut
varier.

[5] Car, en multipliant ces éléments comme dans une pile, on augmente
cette puissance, et l'on parvient ainsi à faire agir dans le même temps
les radiations les plus paresseuses, telles que celles du rouge et du
vert.

[6] L'huile de pétrole la plus convenable est d'un ton jaune-verdâtre,
et prend, sous différents angles, des reflets azurés.

J'ai donné la préférence à cette huile sur les huiles fixes, parce
qu'elle reste toujours limpide, quoique fortement acidulée. Le but que
je me propose en employant une huile acidulée est de réduire les métaux
en poussière et de retenir cette poussière à la surface de la plaque, en
même temps de donner plus d'épaisseur à la couche par ses propriétés
onctueuses; car le naphte qui résulte de la distillation de cette huile
ne produit pas le même effet, parce qu'étant trop fluide, il entraîne la
poussière des métaux. C'est par cette même raison que j'ai conseillé
dernièrement l'emploi de l'_essence de lavande_, plutôt que celui de
l'essence de térébenthine.

[7] Si je préfère, pour polir, le rouge aux autres substances, ce n'est
pas que je lui reconnaisse une propriété photogénique, mais bien parce
qu'il brunit mieux et qu'il aide à fixer la couche d'or qui n'est plus
si susceptible de s'enlever par écailles lorsqu'on la chauffe trop.

Les plaques galvaniques, lorsqu'elles n'ont ni marbrures ni taches
noires (ce qui arrivait quelquefois dans l'origine), reçoivent mieux que
les autres l'application des métaux, et par conséquent le chlorure d'or
y adhérant plus fortement ne s'enlève pas par écailles.

[8] Il faut avoir soin d'appuyer le moins possible, car autrement le
rouge adhérerait à la plaque et formerait un voile général.

[9] Lorsque l'on opérera sur une plaque qui aura reçu longtemps à
l'avance la première préparation, il faudra, avant d'employer l'huile
acidulée et l'oxyde rouge, opérer comme je l'indique plus loin pour la
plaque qui a reçu une épreuve fixée. Cette précaution est nécessaire
pour détruire les taches que le temps pourrait avoir développées.




IMPRIMERIE DE BACHELIER,

RUE DU JARDINET, N° 12.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Nouveau moyen de préparer la couche
sensible des plaques destinées à recevoir les images photographiques, by Louis-Jacques-Mandé Daguerre

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK NOUVEAU MOYEN DE PRÉPARER LA ***

***** This file should be named 16260-8.txt or 16260-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/2/6/16260/

Produced by Carlo Traverso, Melissa Er-Raqabi and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team. This file was produced
from images generously made available by the Bibliothèque
nationale de France (BnF/Gallica)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

*** END: FULL LICENSE ***

